<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en-US">
<head>
<link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<title>IF&#x00C1;: A Forest of Mystery</title>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<p class="fmtitle2"><a id="page_xi"></a>Preface</p>
<p class="noindent">This book ensures that If<span class="small">&#225;</span> spreads across the world, something which is not only exciting, but also divine. In my perception, those people who spread If<span class="small">&#225;</span> as a consequence of integrating its tenets as a way of life, a philosophy or religion, should be known as <i><span class="small">&#7885;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span> <span class="small">&#236;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#7885;</span>l<span class="small">&#7865;</span></i>, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>true children of divinity.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> These people, independent of their colour, race, sex, customs, culture and creed are indeed the true children of divinity. They speak If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, act If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, demonstrate If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, learn If<span class="small">&#225;</span> and teach If<span class="small">&#225;</span> to the world, and in this way they represent the tradition itself.</p>
<p class="indent">What other word can be used to qualify these great souls and beings other than using the If<span class="small">&#225;</span> term <i><span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>e<span class="small">&#7779;</span>e</i>? From the perspective of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, <i><span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>e<span class="small">&#7779;</span>e</i> means <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the great tradition<span class="small">&#8217;</span> in the sense of being an old and venerable religious philosophy maintained and preserved by trusted and devoted people who clamour for knowledge, wisdom, understanding and good character in the physical plane of existence. <i><span class="small">&#204;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>e<span class="small">&#7779;</span>e</i> is the true language of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> that causes If<span class="small">&#225;</span> to spread across the world.</p>
<p class="indent">For me personally, Nicholaj is one of the greatest <i><span class="small">&#7885;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span> <span class="small">&#236;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#7885;</span>l<span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> that I have encountered. His dedication, his way of life and his character testifies to this. He speaks, learns, teaches, lives and writes If<span class="small">&#225;</span>. In doing this he is making sure that the knowledge of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is not shrouded in secrecy but disseminated throughout the world as this knowledge is transformed into written texts, in the form <a id="page_xii"></a>of a book that will benefit humankind. This work is a result of a desire to grow in spirit and dedication to If<span class="small">&#225;</span> only possible for a true devotee. This book demonstrates how the principle of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> flows in the bloodstream of Nicholaj and makes him tradition itself. No other word than <i><span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>e<span class="small">&#7779;</span>e</i> can be used when intellectual prudence, wisdom of diction and light of knowledge takes the shape of <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span> rere</i> (good character) as in this work.</p>
<p class="indent">As a true disciple of Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span>, an initiate of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> and a member of <span class="small">&#7884;</span>gb<span class="small">&#x0273;</span>ni, the society of wise men, Nicholaj with this work establishes his name in the mind, soul and the spirit of people whenever If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is mentioned. What this work accomplishes is to make a mark, announcing a century of miracles and wonders for If<span class="small">&#225;</span>. I say it is a miracle and a wonder because we see today many Yoruba people who instead of embracing their own customs, religion, culture and philosophy are leaving it behind. So it is in truth a miracle to see how a Western man embraces the principles of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, this great storehouse of wisdom that offers insight into the mysterious mind of Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span> <span class="small">&#8211;</span> the infinite being and ageless spirit that brought all things into existence <span class="small">&#8211;</span> with such great wisdom that was passed down through his diviner and messenger known as <span class="small1">orunmila bara agbonniregun akeyo ifa akeyo gbogbo agbaye</span> (<span class="small1">orunmila</span> father of <span class="small1">agbonniregun</span>, the teacher of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> and the renowned master of Earth).</p>
<p class="indent">And like <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>, Nicholaj has not only embraced If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, but he has made an effort to spread its wisdom. In doing this he has not only brought If<span class="small">&#225;</span> to people unfamiliar with the tradition but he has also made it possible for people to bring this old and venerable faith into the lives of others, for the sake of improving the quality of life of all humanity, now and in the future. I am aware I am giving a lot of praise, but in truth this work is truly remarkable. Not only in its way of disseminating the wisdom of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, but also how this work enables the legacy of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> to thrive upon the earth. For those reading this book it will bring hope, as this work radiates light and wisdom, the kind of light we find at the source of all things.</p>
<p class="indent">I am grateful to Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span> and his <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#7885;</span>l<span class="small">&#7865;</span>s</i> as I am grateful for Nicholaj<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s confidence in me, to such an extent that I was asked to write this preface for such a great work. I am grateful for Nicholaj<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s dedication, companionship and support of myself, If<span class="small">&#225;</span> and his family.</p>
<p class="indent">I pray that Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span> will always illuminate Nicholaj and his <i>apet<span class="small">&#7865;</span>bi</i>, Ad<span class="small">&#233;</span>tutu and may his family wherever in the world they might be, be blessed, because for a true devotee of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, humankind is his family. This book shines forth from <a id="page_xiii"></a>the <i>aaf<span class="small">&#237;</span>n im<span class="small">&#x0273;</span></i> (palace of splendour and light) and imparts <i><span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>e<span class="small">&#7779;</span>e</i> to the world. This book is a reminder to all the children of Od<span class="small">&#249;</span>duw<span class="small">&#225;</span> how rich their culture, tradition, religion and wisdom truly are.</p>
<p class="indent">Nicholaj is a good student, a great teacher, a faithful priest, a laudable author, an impressive researcher, a commendable educationist, a praiseworthy pathfinder and I do hope this great work is just the beginning of his dissemination of the wisdom of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>. In wise ways Nicholaj has acted with patience to create a work like this and has been able to bridge a gap between Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> and the Western world with a work of unification and understanding that benefits both worlds and makes them one. He has acted according to what <i><span class="small">&#200;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span> Ogb<span class="small">&#232;</span></i> in one of its verses says:</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">oju ko kan mi</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">emi ko kan ju</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">ni o difa fun ero pese</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">ti o nlo se oko igbin</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">igbin nwa oko</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">ero pese nwa iyawo</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">awon mejeeji wa lo si ile alawo ni otooto</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">ero pese wa bere lowo ifa wipe nje oun le ni aya</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">igbin naa bere lowo alawo re wipe nje oun le ni oko</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">awon babalawo awon mejeeji so fun won wipe,</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">ki won lo rubo ki won si tun lo ni opolopo suuru</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">wipe ati oko ati aya yio pade ara won</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">bayi ni olukaluku won ba lo ru ebo ti babalawo won ka fun</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">won nitori ototo ni won lo si ile alawo</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">ti o si je odu kan naa ni o yo fun awon mejeeji lai mo ara won ri</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">bi won se rubo tan ni ero-pese pade igbin</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">ni won ba soro ti oro won ye ara won,</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">ti won wa gbe ara won ni iyawo</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">ni nkan won ba bere si ni dara si,</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">ti oro won ba dero ti ayo idunnu owo,</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">alafia ati ire gbogbo bere si ni to won lowo</span></p>
<p class="noindent"><span class="small1">ni won wa njo ni won wa nyo</span></p>
</div>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent"><i>I am not in a hurry</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I am not in any haste</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Was the If<span class="small">&#225;</span> divined for Ero Pese (Patience)</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>When he was going to marry Igbin (Snail)</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Igbin was seeking for a husband</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ero Pese was looking for a wife</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>They each went to the house of different diviners</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ero Pese asked the If<span class="small">&#225;</span> diviner if he would be able to find a good wife to marry</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Igbin asked her own If<span class="small">&#225;</span> priest if she would be able to find a good husband to marry</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>The different diviners of the two instructed them to offer sacrifice,</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>and calmly and patiently wait for divine support</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Saying that both the husband and wife would meet each other</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>They offered the sacrifice as instructed by If<span class="small">&#225;</span> and as directed</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>by their respective priests and diviners.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>The same odu appeared for both without them actually knowing one another</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Immediately after the sacrifice was made Ero Pese met Igbi</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>They met and approached each other, fell in love and later got married</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Life became pleasant for the two of them. Happiness, joy, wealth, riches,</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>victory, strength and long life became their lot.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>They were both filled with abundant joy, dancing in merriment.</i></p>
</div>
<p class="indent">The patience and dedication toward If<span class="small">&#225;</span> and its principles is what has caused Nicholaj to make a good marriage between two illuminated realms or worlds, a union that can only lead to bliss and wisdom. It is the kind of marriage that will generate many children who will have their destiny refined and fulfilled. I have no doubt that Nicholaj<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s work will enrich the lives of those who are on the path of life and knowledge. He is indeed a blessed person and holds a great position in the world of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>.</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent1">A dupe! (Thank you!)</p>
<p class="noindent2">Chief <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n<span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#237;</span>n<span class="small">&#224;</span> Babat<span class="small">&#250;</span>nd<span class="small">&#630;</span> <span class="small">&#7884;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>y<span class="small">&#237;</span>nk<span class="small">&#224;</span> Ad<span class="small">&#233;</span>wuy<span class="small">&#236;</span></p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
