<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en-US">
<head>
<link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<title>IF&#x00C1;: A Forest of Mystery</title>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<p class="fmtitle2"><a id="page_1"></a>Introduction</p>
<p class="noindent">If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is a philosophy, a theogony, theology and cosmology rooted in a particular metaphysic that concerns itself with the real and the ideal, the world and its beginning. It is rooted in the constitution of man and the purpose of life and the nature of fate. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is a philosophy of character. The philosophy of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> lies at the root of any religious cult or organization involving the veneration of <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>.</p>
<p class="indent">This book is about If<span class="small">&#225;</span>; a work that aims to present its cosmology and metaphysics as a philosophy which is designed to attract good fortune into our lives. Through stories and legends, divinatory verses and proverbs, this philosophy will be revealed piece by piece until the landscape has been laid open before you.</p>
<p class="indent">Given the premise of this work, Western philosophies have also been referenced. This has been done in order to explain If<span class="small">&#225;</span> in more familiar terms to readers unfamiliar with African cultures at large and to give examples from the wisdom tradition of the West.</p>
<p class="indent">In pursuing this work, I realised that the project could easily span several volumes. It is of course a good thing to discover that one has too much material, but at the same time it has been demanding to choose the most vital parts in order to present the most important themes. As such, this book is an overview of a landscape that can only acknowledge the profound scope of the tradition.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_2"></a>My aim is to present a philosophy of consciousness, step by step. We will undertake a journey, presenting If<span class="small">&#225;</span> philosophy and divination in the first part of the book and then supporting it with the detailed account of the messages in the sixteen <i>m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span> od<span class="small">&#249;</span>s</i> and <i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#x0276;</span>t<span class="small">&#250;</span>r<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> upon which If<span class="small">&#225;</span> philosophy rests. The philosophical enquiries of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> are rooted in a consensus reality that is subjected to constant inquiry. We can say that If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is monist and holds ideas similar to those of pantheism and is resonant with the ideas set forth by Giordano Bruno (1548 <span class="small">&#8211;</span> 1600) in particular. This means that If<span class="small">&#225;</span> finds common ground with the Western neo-Platonic tradition, which can therefore be used as a bridge to reach the timeless and perennial dimensions of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>.</p>
<p class="indent">My own journey within these mysteries started in the 1990s when I went to Cuba and undertook <i>tef<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> (initiation) with Lazaro Cuesta, Eddy Silva and Eddy Silva Jr. in Pogolotti, Havana. It was a profound experience and my gratitude will always be offered to these three wise men. Some years after this initial encounter with If<span class="small">&#225;</span> I encountered other <i>babal<span class="small">&#225;</span>wos</i>, until I finally met Chief <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n<span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#237;</span>n<span class="small">&#224;</span> Ad<span class="small">&#233;</span>wuy<span class="small">&#236;</span>, who opened the doors to his house, his heart and his family, and taught me the value of generosity, kindness, the secrets of abundance and patience. This led to my admittance into the Awon <span class="small">&#7884;</span>gb<span class="small">&#x0273;</span>ni Funfun in Abeokuta, Nigeria, through Ol<span class="small">&#250;</span>wo Sunday <span class="small">&#192;</span>gbefay<span class="small">&#x0275;</span>l<span class="small">&#x0275;</span>l<span class="small">&#x0275;</span>, and I was given the blessing to oversee an <span class="small">&#7864;</span>gb<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span> If<span class="small">&#225;</span> in my own land.</p>
<p class="indent">This book is a way of repaying what I was given; there is a generosity of wisdom encoded within these pages that I want to pass on in the hope that the wisdom of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, which has undoubtedly made my life better, can have the same effect upon yours.</p>
<p class="indent">The verses of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> in this book are largely taken from the collection made by Awo Abimb<span class="small">&#7885;</span>la and found in his <i>If<span class="small">&#225;</span> Divination Poetry</i> (1977), and from P<span class="small">&#243;</span>p<span class="small">&#243;</span><span class="small">&#7885;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#8217;</span>s <i>If<span class="small">&#225;</span> Did<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> (2009) and Karenga<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s <i>Od<span class="small">&#249;</span> If<span class="small">&#225;</span>: The Ethical Teachings</i> (1999). These texts are highly recommended as sources for deepening one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s understanding of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, and it is my hope that this book will enhance the beauty of the legacy presented by these wise men and that appreciation of their work will spread. The translations of the If<span class="small">&#225;</span> verses are my own (unless stated otherwise). I have crosschecked my translations with these writers and with what has been provided to me by Baba <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n<span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#237;</span>n<span class="small">&#224;</span>. I have made an honest effort to translate liturgical Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> as best as I can, a daunting task, which I hope I have accomplished, whilst openly acknowledging that I have leant heavily on the work done by the aforementioned <a id="page_3"></a>Babalawos. The majority of the stories retold in this book can be found in one version or another in Awo P<span class="small">&#243;</span>p<span class="small">&#243;</span><span class="small">&#7885;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#8217;</span>s <i>If<span class="small">&#225;</span> Did<span class="small">&#225;</span></i>, which I suggest as an accessible reference work.</p>
<p class="indent">I also give gratitude to Pierre Colonna, good brother in many mysteries, and Awo F<span class="small">&#225;</span>lok<span class="small">&#250;</span>n who, through his friendship, generosity, and good character, has taught me about If<span class="small">&#225;</span> metaphysics for more than a decade. I further want to offer reverence to my beloved <i>apet<span class="small">&#7865;</span>bi</i>, Ad<span class="small">&#233;</span>tutu <span class="small">&#7864;</span>y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span> <span class="small">&#204;</span>y<span class="small">&#225;</span>miss<span class="small">&#232;</span>, without whom I would not be what I am, and to Babalorisa Ade Oke and ConjureMan Ali, who are truly my brothers throughout a thousand incarnations, to my good brother Childerico for providing the illustrations; and finally to Peter and Alkistis for being rare jewels of clear consciousness and infinite blessings in this world of perpetual mystery.</p>
<p class="indent">With these words, I will do what is proper and give reverence to the forces that were not named, but made these pages possible:</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#204;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent1"><i>I pay my respect to the owner of Heaven and the spirits of the Earth</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I pay my respect to the king of the World, He whom we praise fir<span class="small">&#64262;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>As I give reverence to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>, the Spirit of Destiny</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I pay my respect to the sixteen wombs of the world</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>And their messenger</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Whom we call the youngest one</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>The dearest one at the crossroads of the worlds,</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Whom we call <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent1"><i>I greet the powers of the Ea<span class="small">&#64262;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I greet the powers of the We<span class="small">&#64262;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I greet the powers of the South</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I greet the powers of the North</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I greet the king in the city of Love</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I give homage to the winds in the invisible realms</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I give homage to the owner of Earth</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I who am just a child of my<span class="small">&#64262;</span>ery</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I who am grateful</i></p>
<p class="noindent1"><a id="page_4"></a><i>I give homage to the spirit of the Mountain</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I give homage to the spirit of the Ocean</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I give homage to <span class="small">&#192;</span>k<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#224;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I give homage to <span class="small">&#192;</span>sed<span class="small">&#225;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I give homage to the spirits that move the world</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I give homage to the bones of my blood</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I give reverence to the Oni of Il<span class="small">&#233;</span> If<span class="small">&#x0275;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>For all that he represents in being the pillar</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Between worlds</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I give homage</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I give respect</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>To my Fathers and Mothers</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>To the owner of Heaven and Earth</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>To my Or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I give homage to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>, the spirit of Destiny</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I give homage to Ik<span class="small">&#250;</span>, the spirit of Death</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I give homage to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>nil<span class="small">&#233;</span>, the owner of Earth</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I give homage to <span class="small">&#204;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span>m<span class="small">&#237;</span> <span class="small">&#210;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#x025A;</span>ng<span class="small">&#224;</span>, the Powerful One</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>And I pray that the power of the word</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Will open the sixteen doors of creation</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Wisely and gently</i></p>
<p class="noindent1"><i>In humble love I give my words</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>To spread across the world</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Gently and in dignity</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>May the words in this book</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Bring honour to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>And my family of If<span class="small">&#225;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Who are many</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#192;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i></p>
</div>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent1">Nicholaj de Mattos Frisvold</p>
<p class="noindent">Awo Balog<span class="small">&#250;</span>n If<span class="small">&#225;</span><i><span class="small">&#7779;</span></i><span class="small">&#242;</span>tit<span class="small">&#7885;</span> <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#x0273;</span>wal<span class="small">&#233;</span> <span class="small">&#192;</span>gbefay<span class="small">&#x0275;</span>l<span class="small">&#x0275;</span>l<span class="small">&#x0275;</span></p>
<p class="noindent">21st September 2014</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
