<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en-US">
<head>
<link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<title>IF&#x00C1;: A Forest of Mystery</title>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<p class="chaptitle"><a id="page_6"></a>&#593;e timeless wisdom of If&#225;</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent"><i>If&#225; is the preservation of the ance&#64262;ral wisdom in Yor&#249;b&#225; culture which gives guidance on how to make the right decisions on the journey towards developing good character. If&#225; is not a doctrine of belief; it is a way of looking at the world.</i></p>
<p class="right1">&#8211; Awo Fa&#39;lokun Fatunmbi, 2013.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent"><a id="page_7"></a>If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is a word that has no direct translation. Rather, it reflects a concept of wisdom. It holds the secret of creation, and the key to our happiness. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> has been defined as a divination system, as an alternative name for its prophet, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>, a name given to the religion of the Yor&#249;b&#225; people in present day Nigeria, and more besides. It touches all of these but, at its heart, If&#225; is about the power of wisdom to approach the mysterious and, through this, to offer an understanding of the visible and invisible worlds through which our lives, collective and unique, are made accessible.</p>
<p class="indent">If&#225; is about approaching everything as mysterious. Whether the mystery is great or small, If&#225; invites us to marvel at its beauty as we grow in wisdom. Mystery is encoded in all things that silently reveal how everything is connected in a dance around polarities which mutually a&#64259;rm one another and move the world onwards. Whether it is the mystery of life, creation, God, a plant, or a technical problem which we seem unable to figure out, we are touching If&#225;. It is about approaching all things and every situation with curiosity, because everything is encoded in mystery, awe and riddles. If&#225; is the key which enables us to decode these riddles and mysteries as they appear in our lives, in nature, in all realms of being and existence.</p>
<p class="indent">If we seek to understand mystery, we need to approach everything free from judgment rooted in our limited perception of the world and life, daring to walk outside our truths and to see every situation from different angles. The understanding of the mysterious is passed down in the form of poetic verses, stories, proverbs, enchantments and lore. If&#225; considers &#200;&#7779;&#249; to be the custodian of mystery, as the owner of the crossroads that both bind and separate the visible and the invisible.</p>
<p class="indent">In his capacity as linguist, &#200;&#7779;&#249; serves as a bridge and mediator in all realms, and enables communication between spirit and man, man and plant, beast and spirit. &#200;&#7779;&#249; is also the warden of truth and embodies the principle of choice: therefore he is identified with roads and crossings. Truth, like &#200;&#7779;&#249;, is never static but always dynamic and in a state of flux, like the volcanic lava that gave fire to his soul. Truth is doctrine and not dogma. It is an experience of wisdom and mystery that results in secure and pure knowledge. This truth, this wisdom is then used to better understand the human journey we are undertaking so we can realise our fate. Fate, in the view of If&#225;, denotes the unique route towards happiness and fulfillment. Fate is something that we make. The choices that <a id="page_8"></a>bring us closer to contentment, peace, joy and wealth are the signs that we are walking the path of our fate.</p>
<p class="indent">If&#225; views everything as a simple binary pulse or function, whether inhalation/exhalation, being/non-being, life/death. It is the mathematical algorithm of binary codes that causes you (and, indeed, everything) to be or not be. It is about absence and presence, the fundamental powers that generate the atom, the amoeba, an ensouled life form or a galaxy; it is both simple and intensely complex, as is the rhythm in each and every choice and situation that calls for an action or reaction. Every situation has a host of solutions, every solution invites a choice, and every choice invites new directions. The energetic patterns or frequencies involved in any situation are encoded in the corpus of wisdom known as If&#225;. If&#225; holds the secret to decoding and understanding the energetic patterns involved in benevolent as well as malevolent situations. Fortune and misfortune are measured with the same attitude of interest, so we can discover how to turn misfortune into fortune and how to make our fortune multiply. If&#225; is about possessing the wisdom and disposition that enables us to always see clearly, so we can discern the necessary means to ensure stability and equilibrium, not only in our lives, but in such ways that it can expand and become a stabilising force in the world.</p>
<p class="indent">If&#225; is not a religion; it is an art, a philosophy of life. If&#225; as a philosophy can be laid out and bring forth religions, as much as If&#225; embraced as an art can bring forth mystics and wise adventurers. This is a&#64259;rmed by the Yor&#249;b&#225; vernacular <i>&#7865;sin</i>, a word which means servitude, and is used in reference to religions such as Christianity, Islam, and Judaism. The Yor&#249;b&#225; people call what they are doing <i>asa</i> or <i>oro ibile</i>, which refers to a custom related to the land, a connotation which possesses a strong ancestral quality.</p>
<p class="indent">If&#225; is monist in the sense that it holds that every possibility was made feasible from a singular condition, or source, which held all possibilities within the form of being; this was at the same time absolute being and absolute absence. The beginning of all things is envisioned as light springing forth from darkness. Through its letting out rays of light, all things are enabled to take form and expression. If&#225; is about the beginning of consciousness, because consciousness is the beginning of all things. We can say that If&#225; represents a reality of consciousness in which the ideal or invisible world is viewed as more &#8216;real&#8217; than the material world.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_9"></a>One consequence of this view of reality is what happens with the faculty of judgment. Throughout the If&#225; corpus of divinatory verses we will see that any judgments subject to temporal truths are those which we assess from a limited sphere of personal action, lived out in a horizontal reality within a limited perspective. If&#225; is the illumination that expands our vision and helps us make better choices in the light of understanding our mysterious world. We judge in conformity with proximity and distance, familiarity or alienation &#8211; and what we experience as real and material. If&#225; represents the light of clarity that emanates from the beginning of time, which we can choose to access or not. If&#225; can be said to be a philosophical idealism, noetic by temperament &#8211; yet positive philosophies, evolutionary theories, and quantum mechanics naturally find their place within its encompassing wisdom.</p>
<p class="indent">The idealism of If&#225; aspires to be inclusive, because it is a philosophy concerned with the totality of human experience. It holds as an axiom that we are spiritual beings undertaking a human journey. If&#225; presents us with an enchanted world in which everything is alive with divine light and potency. We can say that If&#225; is &#8216;traditional&#8217; and &#8216;hermetic,&#8217; and that there is a deep sympathy between it and the Platonic philosophy that descends through Proclus, Plotinus and Ficino. Equally, it is easy to find resonance between If&#225; and such modern philosophers as Hegel, Schopenhauer and Leibniz. But more than this, we can analyse the sixteen <i>od&#249;</i> pairs as presenting a given ray, or philosophy, within the greater philosophy of If&#225;, that illustrates how this particular route acts in the visible and invisible worlds. A constant premise in If&#225; is that philosophy should be a good contemplation, it should be a kind of knowledge that enables us to make good choices as it cultivates discernment and clarity. This being said, perhaps Boethius (c. 475 &#8211; 526) is the Western philosopher who has the most intimate resonance with If&#225;.</p>
<p class="indent">The philosophy of Boethius was firmly anchored in the concept of Fortune, which he presented within a world view similar to the view expressed in the If&#225; corpus. Boethius was a student of Plotinus, and he similarly accorded great importance to Aristotelian logic, considering that it did not interfere with his greater neo-Platonic orientation, as it was solely concerned with the sensorial field of experience. If&#225; would see this in the same way, logic being tied into the sensorial world in the form of <i>ara</i> (body), <i>&#236;w&#224;</i> (character), and <i>or&#237;</i> (consciousness) which, together with <i>&#232;m&#237;</i> (breath), make up the fundamental parts of the <a id="page_10"></a>human being and make it possible for us to experience the world. Boethius&#8217; best known work was <i>The Consolation of Philosophy</i>, in which he expressed the opinion that philosophy should teach and stimulate people to search for happiness. He said that everything is good, as even that which we deem evil might serve to make us better people, or be the obstacle we need to clearly see where we should search for our happiness. Wickedness will only become wicked if we allow it to multiply by inviting it into our life and clouding our vision of happiness, because it is not a part of goodness &#8211; and goodness is God. Therefore, since it is not a part of what is good it will, like most abnormal flares in the cosmic fabric, disintegrate and self destruct. This argument is lifted from Plato&#8217;s <i>Gorgias</i>, in which he argues with perfect erudition for the powerless state of wickedness. This argument is later substantiated in <i>The Republic</i>, where Plato comments that fate is not allotted, but chosen. This comment is quite often interpreted in a materialistic fashion, which contains only a part of the truth. Boethius, like Plato, holds that what is perfect, and what is good, and what is beautiful, is not solely a quality of God, but it is to all effects the godhead. This means that fate is seen as something good, perfect and beautiful, but it is our choices that drive us towards it or away from it. In other words, no person is allotted a bad fate; rather, a bad fate is brought into effect by our choices. In a similar vein, If&#225; is of the opinion that we are all born good and blessed and destined to goodness and happiness. We are here on earth to do good, just as Plato states in <i>Gorgias</i> that everyone wants happiness and sees this as equal to what is good. Quite simply, if goodness and happiness are the very matter of creation and the godhead, the absence of what is good will naturally fall short of increase as it is in itself counterproductive. Not only this, but in <i>Gorgias</i> Plato argues that wickedness makes people use their humanity in constantly self-harming ways, thus they gradually diminish into lower forms of existence in their unhappy state.</p>
<p class="indent">Boethius argues for God being both a final cause and the e&#64259;cient cause of all things. In doing this, he gives prime attention to the importance of recognising what is good in the material world, hence the focus on the concept of &#8216;fortune&#8217; and &#8216;consolation&#8217; that runs through his philosophical discourse. As we shall see later in this chapter, these ideas find resonance in the fundamental philosophical structure of If&#225;, as it is rooted in the premise that goodness is the essential essence of being, and perfection is the fabric used to carve out beauty in creation. If&#225; is disclosed through philosophical axioms encoded in songs, <a id="page_11"></a>verses and proverbs that make part of the corpus of <i>od&#249;</i>, which we can define as &#8216;words from the womb of creation.&#8217; One of these verses is from an <i>od&#249;</i> known as <i>&#236;ros&#249;w&#242;r&#236;</i> which gives the following teaching about the purpose of the human journey, here in the translation of M. Karenga (1999: 228 &#8211; 233):</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent"><i>Let us do things with joy</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Those who want to go, let them go</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Those who want to stay, let them stay</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Surely, humans have been chosen to bring</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Good into the world</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>The All-Knowing One, priest of <span class="small">&#x00d4;r&#250;nm&#236;l&#224;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Interpreted the teaching of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> for <span class="small">&#x00d4;r&#250;nm&#236;l&#224;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>He said the people of the world would come</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>To ask him a certain question</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>He said <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> should sacrifice</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> heard and complied</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>One day all kinds of people, good people and</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Those who do not allow good in other</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>People&#8217;s lives gathered together</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>They went to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>They said: &#8216;Coming back and forth to earth</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Tires us, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Therefore, please allow us to rest in heaven&#8217;</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> said: <span class="small">&#8216;</span>You cannot avoid going</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>back and forth to earth,</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Until you bring about the good condition that</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span> has ordained for every human being.<span class="small">&#8217;</span></i></p>
</div>
<p class="indent">The people of the earth ask him what this good condition is and <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> says it is about a good world, the bounty of knowledge, happiness and peace, and the absence of fear, anxiety, poverty and misery. He goes on to state that the remedy for this lies in developing good character and internal strength so that we can love doing what is good. Until everyone achieves this condition, people will continue to walk back and forth from heaven to earth until they are <span class="small">&#8216;</span>recognised as human beings<span class="small">&#8217;</span> or <i><span class="small">&#232;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span>n</i>.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_12"></a>This approach to If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, as a philosophy oriented around character as a source for good fortune that underlies any religious expression, is heavily expanded on by several Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> writers, and in particular Yemi D. Ogunyemi, who insists on the separation between philosophy and religion in the plurality of expressions of faith we find in Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span>land. He summarizes the religious component of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> as being related to its ethical dimension when he writes: <span class="small">&#8216;</span>The most important feature of Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> ethics is not obedience, disobedience, reward or punishment. It is <span class="small">&#204;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span> (character).<span class="small">&#8217;</span> (1998: 14).</p>
<p class="indent">If<span class="small">&#225;</span> as such is the spiritual philosophy of character as held, developed and cultivated by the Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> speaking people of West Africa and several of their neighbouring nations. Regarding If<span class="small">&#225;</span> as a storehouse of wisdom accessed for the needs of the community, and as the energetic constitution of a community and its actors themselves, leads to a great variety of schools and traditions of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>. It is therefore di<span class="small">&#64259;</span>cult to define If<span class="small">&#225;</span> as a religion in the common Western sense; there is an absence of religious dogma in favor of mystical doctrine.</p>
<p class="indent">When the word If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is mentioned, the most common association is with its oracular arts, and the geomantic divination that, though often called If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, is correctly named <i>daf<span class="small">&#225;</span></i>, meaning <span class="small">&#8216;</span>to spread out wisdom.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> If<span class="small">&#225;</span> initiation is known as <i>t<span class="small">&#233;</span>f<span class="small">&#225;</span></i>, a word signifying <span class="small">&#8216;</span>to press and spread out the wisdom of attraction and fortune.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> This distinction is important, because when If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is set into action for the purpose of divination, it takes on a particular meaning and function. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is the storehouse of wisdom, manipulated and revealed during the process of <i>daf<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> and <i>t<span class="small">&#233;</span>f<span class="small">&#225;</span></i>. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is an active involvement with the potency of wisdom.</p>
<p class="indent">As stated at the beginning of this chapter, there are many opinions as to what the word If<span class="small">&#225;</span> means, and over the years I have come to find Chief <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n<span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#237;</span>n<span class="small">&#224;</span> Ad<span class="small">&#233;</span>wuy<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#8217;</span>s understanding of it to be the clearest. He states that If<span class="small">&#225;</span> means <span class="small">&#8216;</span>to instigate an attraction.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> If we look at the use of the words <i>fa</i>, <i>f<span class="small">&#225;</span></i>, <i>f<span class="small">&#224;</span></i> and <i>f<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> in the Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> language, we will see that they are always used in relation to bending something, to uprooting, to unveiling, or to attraction. The sound <i>I</i> is often used as a signal to begin the process of attraction, so If<span class="small">&#225;</span> can be an elision of <i>ir<span class="small">&#233;</span> fa</i>, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the art of attracting good fortune<span class="small">&#8217;</span> or even <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the art of bending fortune in your favour.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> No matter how we choose to interpret the word, If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is concerned with how we attract good fortune, therefore it is from this premise that I understand it to be a living and oracular philosophy that teaches us how we can bring what is good and fortunate into our lives. From this simple premise, the beautiful complexity <a id="page_13"></a>of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> surges in riddles and verses, axioms and proverbs that aim to make us understand the dynamic between presence and absence as the prime pulse of creation, being and life. For instance, one Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> proverb emphasises that good fortune comes with the knowledge of misfortune: <i>T<span class="small">&#237;</span> <span class="small">&#224;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span> nj<span class="small">&#232;</span> oh<span class="small">&#249;</span>n <span class="small">&#224;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>d<span class="small">&#237;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>n la<span class="small">&#236;</span> j<span class="small">&#232;</span> <span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#243;</span>gb<span class="small">&#243;</span>, <span class="small">&#243;</span>nje y<span class="small">&#237;</span>o p<span class="small">&#224;</span>d<span class="small">&#225;</span>n<span class="small">&#249;</span> <span class="small">&#224;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>n r<span class="small">&#233;</span></i>, which can be translated as: <span class="small">&#8216;</span>If we eat sweet things and avoid the bitter kola, all food will lose its flavour.<span class="small">&#8217;</span></p>
<p class="h3">the chosen one and the marketplace</p>
<p class="indent">A famous If<span class="small">&#225;</span> proverb states: <i>Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span> l<span class="small">&#8217;</span>oja, <span class="small">&#x025A;</span>run n<span class="small">&#8217;</span>il<span class="small">&#233;</span></i>, meaning: <span class="small">&#8216;</span>This, our world, is a market, but heaven is our home.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> When If<span class="small">&#225;</span> identifies this world with a marketplace, it understands the human field of activity to be one of interactions, deals, transitions and trade. It is a field of movement that challenges us on several levels. In the marketplace we find an ever changing plethora of energy, frequency and vibration. We experience the active side of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> in the realm of possibilities. This is always caused by a manifestation of one of the 256 <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span>s</i>, the energetic vibrations of creation, which can be understood as specific frequencies that serve both as causes and explanations for our experiences. Furthermore, it is in the If<span class="small">&#225;</span> literature, written and oral, that we find the vast field of knowledge pertaining to If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, again reflected through the lens of the 256 <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span>s</i>. Adekson writes:</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent">If<span class="small">&#225;</span> has challenging ideas that generate philosophical knowledge in metaphysics, ethics, epistemology, and science ... <span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> (If<span class="small">&#225;</span>) possesses knowledge of the following subjects: the study of nature (physics), animals (biology), plants (botany), oral incantations (<i>of<span class="small">&#242;</span></i>), divination (prediction), medicinal plants (herbalism), physiology (anatomy), and sciences associated with healing diseases (medicine)... If<span class="small">&#225;</span> foretells by warning and provides solutions to anticipated events or problems (2003: 24).</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is the spiritual philosophy which underlies such concepts as <i>m<span class="small">&#233;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span>nd<span class="small">&#237;</span>nl<span class="small">&#243;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i> (cowry shell divination), <i>ob<span class="small">&#237;</span> <span class="small">&#224;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#224;</span></i> (kola nut divination), <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> (deified spiritual forces) and <i>eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i> (spirits of death and ancestry), which form a nucleus in Afro Diaspora faiths such as Santeria, Lukumi, Candombl<span class="small">&#233;</span>, and the <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> cult in Trinidad and Tobago. It is also present in the mystery known as Milocan <a id="page_14"></a><span class="small">&#8211;</span> or sometimes just If<span class="small">&#233;</span> <span class="small">&#8211;</span> in Haitian Vodou, and we find it under the name of F<span class="small">&#225;</span>/Af<span class="small">&#225;</span> at the heart of Beninese and Togolese Vodu, which consistently give the Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> speaking district of Ketu as the source of their F<span class="small">&#225;</span>, as do several terreiros of Candombl<span class="small">&#233;</span>.</p>
<p class="indent">It is interesting that Ketu is often mentioned, because it is the home of <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>. At times we find the term Nago/Anago used, which defines a Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> speaking people in the district nowadays belonging to Benin where it meets with Nigeria <span class="small">&#8211;</span> these are basically the people of Ketu. Because <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> is the power of the crossroads, he is also the power of dispersion, the potential for action and consequence that springs forth from If<span class="small">&#225;</span>. We might understand his role in the world to be the energy that moves the various frequencies we encounter in the marketplace. As such, comprehending this force is crucial to an understanding of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> and of how the world works in its simple complexity.</p>
<p class="indent">If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, as a system of divination, can be found in the Arabic practice of <span class="small">&#8216;</span><i>ilm-alraml</i> or sand cutting. From there it passes, via Renaissance scholars, into Western geomancy. We can understand geomancy as divination by means of earth or sand that takes the stellar bodies into consideration <span class="small">&#8211;</span> hence, it is deeply related to astrology, or the ways of heaven. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is earth divination, and as such, it offers the solution to situations that occur on earth, that touch everything here.</p>
<p class="indent">If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is concerned with the individual and the group. It is a philosophy that insists upon the necessity of harmonious gatherings. It insists that we are all born good and blessed. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> sees the human journey as one undertaken by spiritual beings, hence our life on earth should be a beautiful experience poised between bitterness and sweetness, which will lead us to a happy and fulfilled station. A lack of joy is to be understood as a challenge or a mistake, as everything has a solution. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> sees truth as being born from the perception that we as individuals are in communion with everything in the cosmos, and it avoids dogma by propounding a doctrine of light.</p>
<p class="indent">If<span class="small">&#225;</span> recognises that everything that exists consists of rays of light and their vibrations, hence it is important to recognise and understand them, whether they proceed from a friend or a foe, and assess them without holding any personal attachment to the judgment we pass. The concept of light is equated with consciousness <span class="small">&#8211;</span> thus everything in cosmos, creation, and nature possesses light in the form of consciousness. The greater our understanding of the various rays of light and energetic frequencies that take form in the world, the more freely <a id="page_15"></a>will we be able to move in the world and participate in this marketplace with elegance, e<span class="small">&#64259;</span>cacy and gentleness, and so reap lasting fortune. To paraphrase Ogunyemi (1998): <span class="small">&#8216;</span>everyone has something to sell, even if no one wants our product.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> If our product is not valued, we need to assess what we are offering and give deeper consideration to who we are, so that our product, the effects of our character, which makes part of what we have to offer, can be circulated in the marketplace.</p>
<p class="indent">The concept of the marketplace is an important one. It is the field in which transactions, deals, pacts and relationships, both good and bad, are struck. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> states that the marketplace belongs to woman and by this suggests that she holds the field, with transaction as a form of <i><span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> or power naturally belonging to her. We are here on earth because of woman and because of woman we can make a good or bad fortune for ourselves, just as we can make a good or bad deal.</p>
<p class="indent">We constantly find, both in If<span class="small">&#225;</span> verses and in its philosophical interpretation, that one situation has a thousand mirrors in all possible directions and dimensions. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is all about the hermetic axiom, as above, so below <span class="small">&#8211;</span> the below is always seen as a crossroads, and the chain of choices made at each of its four gates reveal images of the invisible world above. As M. A. M<span class="small">&#224;</span>kind<span class="small">&#232;</span> wrote when quoting an If<span class="small">&#225;</span> proverb (M. A. M<span class="small">&#224;</span>kind<span class="small">&#232;</span> 1984: 88):</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent"><i>Wisdom is known as If<span class="small">&#225;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Knowledge is the other name for Opele If<span class="small">&#225;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Because we are bound to have problems.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>It is to be informed about something we are ignorant of</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>That If<span class="small">&#225;</span> exists to help us.</i></p>
</div>
<p class="indent">The human being is known as <i><span class="small">&#232;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span>n</i>, <i>eni</i>, or <i>ar<span class="small">&#225;</span> Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span></i>, and these terms encapsulate different qualities. While <i>eni</i> and <i>ar<span class="small">&#225;</span> Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span></i> refer to unique human being, an inhabitant of Earth, <i><span class="small">&#232;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span>n</i> is a composite of words that hints of distress, but also of its solution through careful analysis. So we might see a distinction here between <i><span class="small">&#232;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span>n</i> as one who to some extent has retained a conviction or a memory of their spiritual estate, and <i>ar<span class="small">&#225;</span> Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span></i>, which does not hold this quality and can refer to whosoever walks the earth <span class="small">&#8211;</span> hence we find <i><span class="small">&#232;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span>n</i> meaning <span class="small">&#8216;</span>a person of power<span class="small">&#8217;</span> in reference to someone who possesses <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#x0276;</span></i> in the sense of witch power and the capacity for generating abundance. In the concept of <i><span class="small">&#232;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span>n</i>, we find the <a id="page_16"></a>mysteries of death, humanity and divinity woven into one secret, because our human condition is caused by death and it is through the human experience that we can realise our divinity.</p>
<p class="indent">In the more religious interpretations of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> in the African derived faiths that took shape in the New World as a consequence of the transatlantic crossing, it is noticeable that these three parts are often separated. The dead and ancestors, <i>eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i>, are considered as different to <i><span class="small">&#232;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span>n</i> and <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>, whereas the latter have taken on the role of deities and are seen as separate from both humans and the dead. However, in traditional If<span class="small">&#225;</span> philosophy, <i>eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i> and <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> are part of the human being, and to die, the state of <i>eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i>, is a prerequisite for assuming one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s natural state as a potential <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>.</p>
<p class="indent">The ascent of light in If<span class="small">&#225;</span> cosmology sees it as emanating from one source and spreading throughout the cosmos until it is reflected back in the material realm, much as Plotinus described his noetic cosmology in <i>The Enneads</i>. In his work, Plotinus deliberately does not give a location for the One, the original impulse that manifested into creation. The beginning and end remain unfixed presences, which enable the tension between absolute unity and the variety of unique presences and multiplicity of forms of consciousness in creation.</p>
<p class="indent">It follows that we might see a play between presence and displacement woven into Plotinus<span class="small">&#8217;</span> metaphysics, which is remarkably similar to what we find at the root of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>. In If<span class="small">&#225;</span> terminology, Plotinus<span class="small">&#8217;</span> One is called <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>y<span class="small">&#237;</span>g<span class="small">&#237;</span>yig<span class="small">&#236;</span></i>, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the stone that begins beginnings.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> It is conceived of as a primordial stone that bursts open with luminous heat, finding its mirror in the flowing magma at the centre of our earth, which is the field of <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>. This is part of the reason why this spiritual force is given a unique position in the metaphysics of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>.</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> is the youngest of the <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> that came to Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span> <span class="small">&#8211;</span> but, in the mirror world in which we exist, this means that he was the oldest. He was the primordial stone lodged within Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span>, maintaining a pure and absolute consciousness of the beginning of beginnings, and thus he surfaced last. He rose from within the earth as the primordial stone and crossroads after the denizens of heaven made their dwelling place here. Thus he gave the impression of being the youngest, the one who came last, even though he was here all along.</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> is a paradox in all senses. He is the youngest, yet the oldest, he was gestated as a woman, but was transformed into a male, he is a rock, and yet the fire. He is choice, blessing and demise. He is the power of enigma in the world that <a id="page_17"></a>makes wonder possible. But as he is a paradox of beginnings and endings, he shall be spoken of bit by bit until he is fully revealed in the final chapter of this work. Let us now return to the primordial stone of creation that is conceived of as resting in the primal womb, <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i>, a cosmic matrix, a form of energetic whiteness, or light, that implodes in a nuclear stasis, and then expands into bright possibilities of powers.</p>
<p class="indent">From the womb of whiteness, <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i>, there is made manifest a primordial light that generates the fundamental energetic potencies in creation, which If<span class="small">&#225;</span> calls <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>m<span class="small">&#x0273;</span>l<span class="small">&#x0275;</span></i>, meaning <span class="small">&#8216;</span>dwellers in light<span class="small">&#8217;</span> or <span class="small">&#8216;</span>brightness.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> The fundamental principle in a cosmic process of expansion is known as <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#7885;</span>l<span class="small">&#7865;</span></i>, which means <span class="small">&#8216;</span>whiteness sprouts hairs<span class="small">&#8217;</span> or <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the celestial dwellers sprout in luminosity.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> Awo Fa<span class="small">&#39;</span>lokun has noted that this is similar to the birth of a supernova. In other words, it is a stellar explosion of enormous energy and luminosity, leading to the generation of a new star. The stars and planets are known as <i>igb<span class="small">&#225;</span>m<span class="small">&#x0273;</span>l<span class="small">&#x0275;</span></i>, meaning <span class="small">&#8216;</span>calabash of light,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> and they in turn radiate <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> <span class="small">&#236;</span>k<span class="small">&#242;</span>l<span class="small">&#232;</span> <span class="small">&#242;</span>run</i>, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the shards of consciousness that dwell in heaven.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> Some of these come to earth and are called <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> <span class="small">&#236;</span>k<span class="small">&#242;</span>l<span class="small">&#232;</span> ay<span class="small">&#233;</span></i>, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the shards of consciousness that dwell in the realm of earth.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> When this form of consciousness enters the earth, it is known as <i>eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i>, or <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> or<span class="small">&#237;</span> eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i>, meaning <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the consciousness that brings brightness to the bones.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> It ends in the concept of <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span> inu</i>, the consciousness within each and every thing on earth, whether human, animal, vegetable or mineral. This means that each and every one of us possesses a supracelestial consciousness. Through our <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span> inu</i>, we are in touch with the realm of eternity and beginnings. We are, as Fa<span class="small">&#39;</span>lokun has stated in several of his books, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the eyes of the creator looking back at itself.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> At the same time, all things in nature partake of this memory, which is evident in the way in which the If<span class="small">&#225;</span> divination verses make no separation between man, divinities, plants, and animals when they illustrate the context and nature of a situation.</p>
<p class="h3">woman as the symbol of character</p>
<p class="indent">At the centre of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> philosophy we find <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i>, which lies at the root of the word <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>. <i>Or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> is constantly connected with <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span></i>, character, and it is necessary to give some attention to these concepts. At the root of this enquiry into the nature of character or <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span></i> in <i>If<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> we find that our purpose is to cultivate <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span> rere</i> or <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span> p<span class="small">&#232;</span>l<span class="small">&#232;</span></i>, <a id="page_18"></a>meaning a good or happy character. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> sees the relationship between man and <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span></i> as equal to the relationship between a man and woman and therefore, we can transpose these recommendations onto how men should treat women.</p>
<p class="indent">The <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span> Ogb<span class="small">&#232;</span> Al<span class="small">&#225;</span>r<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> tells us that <span class="small">&#204;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span> was a beautiful woman. But she was not easy to live with, on the contrary the <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> speaks of her as lazy and lewd, with a poisonous tongue. After many years of marriage, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> could no longer provide for his beautiful wife and sent her away. As a consequence, he started to feel miserable and soon after he lost status, money, friends and his own happiness. Upon consulting If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, he realised that he had brought this misfortune upon himself and decided to go after the beautiful and unruly <span class="small">&#204;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span>. He made <i><span class="small">&#7865;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i> (offering) to Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n (the collective wisdom of the ancestors) and set out to search for <span class="small">&#204;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span>. He went to all the sixteen kings of the kingdom in search of her and finally found her in the house of Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>j<span class="small">&#243;</span>, at the Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n grove, and took her back.</p>
<p class="indent">There are many things to learn from this story, the most important being that it takes time to build a good character or <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span> rere</i> <span class="small">&#8211;</span> hence the saying: <i>S<span class="small">&#249;</span><span class="small">&#250;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span> ni baba <span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span> rere</i>, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>patience is the father of good character.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> The <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> is therefore a warning against being judgmental and critical both towards ourselves and others. Here we need to address and understand the purpose of <i><span class="small">&#232;</span>gb<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i>, meaning <span class="small">&#8216;</span>dirt<span class="small">&#8217;</span> or <span class="small">&#8216;</span>waste.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> This word is commonly used in reference to things, acts, and attitudes considered dirty and wasteful. <span class="small">&#204;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span> was spoken of in this verse as a beautiful woman of filthy habits. In this we find a warning against judging acts and people. We should note that If<span class="small">&#225;</span> realises that creation, the Great Design, is just as it is supposed to be, and when we enter into condemnation, dogmatise and exercise moral denigration we are displaying a lack of understanding based upon a distorted perception of the matter at hand.</p>
<p class="indent">We see this in the realm of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n <span class="small">&#8211;</span> <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> of herbs, roots and leaves <span class="small">&#8211;</span> where we find a curious similarity between If<span class="small">&#225;</span> traditional herbalism and plant alchemy in the West. The first stages of alchemy are focused on what is called a blackening of the matter, where death or waste is extracted from the essence. From the waste a final and most peculiar essence is derived for completing the herbal remedy or medicine. This same preparation is made in several works for preparing <i><span class="small">&#243;</span><span class="small">&#242;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i>, a powerful medicine in which the plant waste can be reused, and with the aid of fire, the final virtue of the plant extracted and reintroduced to the medicine. If this parallel is applied to the relationship we find between man in growth and <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span></i> we see that to generate <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span> rere</i> is a process by which we <a id="page_19"></a>gradually leave the dross and waste in favour of the pure essences of being filled with virtue and joy. It is, furthermore, a directive to not make hasty judgments based upon subjective opinions. We might say that the verse speaks about how the road towards good character starts with the acceptance of who we are, inclusive of the good and the bad. It is only when we accept our self that we can develop towards having a good character.</p>
<p class="indent">Abimb<span class="small">&#7885;</span>la comments in <i>Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> Oral Traditions</i> (1975) that to possess <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span> rere</i> can at times be a burden, just as a rebellious wife is a burden; but still, he who possesses <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span> rere</i> must cultivate it, because the presence of this person makes the world a better place. It is an admonition to not allow oneself to fall into corruption, but rather to be hopeful and to approach challenges with curiosity and devout optimism. It is true that there are people who feel the presence of a good person in their midst as something evil, because the contrast is so great between the elevated joy of being radiating from the person who possesses <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span> rere</i> and those who are driven by selfish ambition to satisfy all their materialistic urges. This is why humility, kindness, generosity and calmness of mind are always expressions of good character. However, it is only people who possess <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span> rere</i> who will have everything, as one If<span class="small">&#225;</span> proverb states:</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent"><i>If you have money,</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>But if you do not have good character,</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>The money belongs to somebody else.</i></p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Woman is the symbol of character, and it is due to her ambiguity that she and <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span></i> are seen as partaking of the same nature. The <i><span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> of womanhood as manifested in <i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i> represents the idea of the interference of supernatural forces, of the malefic forces in the world, <i>ajog<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i> and the <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#x00e8;</span></i>, the powers that people experience as threats to the stability of creation whilst they are in truth divine mechanisms to bring about cosmic order as a result of constant change. On the other hand we find in <i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#x0276;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i> the manifestation of sweetness, riches and abundance in the form of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un.</p>
<p class="indent"><i><span class="small">&#204;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span></i> can be said to reflect these two patterns of cosmic reality, which manifest as good and bad character. This does not mean that <i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i> is a bad <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i>, but that many people have problems realising the magnificent mysteries veiled within it, and thus reflect a distortion or degeneration of its wonderful qualities. Woman <a id="page_20"></a>is understood to possess these qualities naturally, and moreover, she also possesses <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> (the womb), which means that a man<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s access to <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> is demonstrated by looking at his <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span></i> in both senses of the word, as his character and as a woman or wife. Woman is therefore the enigmatic centre of all possibility, especially that of cultivating <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span>rere</i>.</p>
<p class="indent">We need to realise that our fortune and future happiness are completely dependent upon how we approach and understand <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span></i>. Character is beautiful, it is a way of being in the world. This is the meaning of the contraction of <i>i-w<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> into <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span></i>, the way of being in the world. Fa<span class="small">&#39;</span>lokun Fatunmbi has repeatedly pointed out that the important Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> terms related to character and purpose are those such as <i><span class="small">&#7865;</span>gb<span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> (companions gathered as in a society), <i><span class="small">&#7885;</span>k<span class="small">&#224;</span>n</i> (heart), and <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>f<span class="small">&#233;</span></i> (love). The heart and love are the foundations for building good character. This means that the centre of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, Il<span class="small">&#233;</span> If<span class="small">&#x0275;</span>, actually contains a subtle reference to it being a <span class="small">&#8216;</span>House of Love.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> Love is the foundation of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>. Just as a marriage is a process towards unity and mutual understanding that aims to create a stable unit of happiness founded in love, so is the journey towards understanding, integrating and reflecting happiness accomplished by embracing <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span></i>.</p>
<p class="h3"><span class="testing">&#x00ee;</span>w<span class="testing">&#224;</span> and or<span class="testing">&#x00ef;</span></p>
<p class="indent"><i><span class="small">&#204;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span> rere</i> is a term that contains a rich web of connections, because the one who possesses the qualities which are described as good character will experience all the goodness of life. Such a person will always harvest benevolence from the ruling powers, both spiritual and social, as the result of being a harmonious element in all the worlds. <i><span class="small">&#204;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span></i> gives the direction to our or<span class="small">&#237;</span>, consciousness. <i><span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>nd<span class="small">&#225;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i> says that no divine being blesses a man without the consent or knowledge of his <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i>. <i>Or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> is intimately connected with <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span></i> because <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> is your personal divinity, by allegory your genius or daimon. The <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> speaks with the language of air, wind and the heart. As the world moves away from the wealth of traditional wisdom, the more di<span class="small">&#64259;</span>cult it becomes to understand the ways in which <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> interacts with us, and this distance provokes a feeling of being lost. <i>Or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> is the divinity that is responsible for your success and failure in life, and it is or<span class="small">&#237;</span> that opens and closes doors and opportunities. Acts of self-sabotage, whether by rejecting opportunities or by making wrong choices, are caused by our refusing <a id="page_21"></a>to accept the blessings <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> wants to give us. This can be a result of disbelief, feelings of inferiority, shame or self-denigration in its manifold forms.</p>
<p class="indent">Abimb<span class="small">&#7885;</span>la (1975) notes that when we chose our <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> in the sense of a fusion of consciousness, guardian deity and <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>p<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i> or <i>k<span class="small">&#225;</span>d<span class="small">&#225;</span>r<span class="small">&#225;</span></i>, and our destined lot of fortune, we also chose a specific route that we need to embark upon in order to harvest the happy fruits of life. When we stand in the sculptor <span class="small">&#192;</span>j<span class="small">&#224;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#8217;</span>s house to choose our <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> and destiny, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> is present as <i>el<span class="small">&#233;</span>r<span class="small">&#237;</span>-<span class="small">&#236;</span>p<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i> (witness of destiny) and becomes in that moment the compass for our journey through the human experience.</p>
<p class="indent">Ogb<span class="small">&#232;</span>g<span class="small">&#249;</span>nd<span class="small">&#225;</span> tells us about the elements involved in the transition of divine beings who choose to experience human life, and the recurring theme in If<span class="small">&#225;</span> of patience, honour and humility is found here too. This involves listening to advice from elders and being slow, if ever, to judge. The <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> tells of various challenges that we are presented with, which in turn generate choices and thus make up the map for our journey in the market of the worlds. This means that we have already chosen our ordeals and fortunes as human beings. It also means that those who feel that they have been given an unhappy lot are not really starting their journey from the right perspective. For every obstacle or challenge there are always several choices and at least one of those choices will bring us closer to our destiny, carried on the wings of wisdom. <i><span class="small">&#200;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span> Ogb<span class="small">&#232;</span></i> tells us that: <span class="small">&#8216;</span>he who is wise, is made wise by his <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i>,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> and this is the consequence of embracing this wonderful condition of life on earth with the right spirit. Wisdom walks hand in hand with the fortunes given. Another remark I have often heard is that, upon receiving the <i>it<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> (the reading concluding initiation that reveals in part the destiny you chose), people can consider the <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> that reveals itself as bad or even evil. These people engage in the negative aspects of the <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span> <span class="small">&#204;</span>r<span class="small">&#7865;</span>t<span class="small">&#x0275;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i>, namely self-hexing, a reaction quite common in our world, where guilt and the distribution of guilt in the hunt for feeling good about oneself is often found. This is evident in the simplest unit of social interaction we have today, between couples. Situations deemed di<span class="small">&#64259;</span>cult often turn into a vehicle for projecting one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s own accumulated poison outwards, and onto one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s partner in particular. In many cases this leads to damage to one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s own sense of worth and as a consequence worse choices are taken. A vicious cycle has begun, and the emerging feeling of being lost becomes a sour reality. It all comes down to <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i>.</p>
<p class="indent">The concept of <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> is intriguing. As mentioned, the <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>m<span class="small">&#x0273;</span>l<span class="small">&#x0275;</span></i> in charge of this process <a id="page_22"></a>is called <span class="small">&#192;</span>j<span class="small">&#224;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>, meaning <span class="small">&#8216;</span>Dog of Light.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> This term is a reference to dogs as messengers for spirit and of light, being the common substance we all partake in, so in this we find a reference to direction within the light as well as a given quality, which we also find in <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>, being encoded into our consciousness. <span class="small">&#192;</span>j<span class="small">&#224;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>, however, is described as an insufferable drunkard and gambler; hence, in spite of his masterful skills in sculpting consciousness, he nonetheless often makes errors <span class="small">&#8211;</span> the <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span>s</i> he makes crack in the fire, get burned, or are too soft. Before we embark upon our human journey, we go to <span class="small">&#192;</span>j<span class="small">&#224;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#8217;</span>s house to select our <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i>, but the choice is not always easy, as the flaws in his sculpting are rarely visible. By selecting an <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> we also elect a given energetic current and with it a given destiny. Such a destiny is to be understood as a way of being in the world that will lead to all good things. When we arrive on earth with an impaired consciousness, these defects can be mended by accumulating wisdom set into action, <i><span class="small">&#7865;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i> (sacrifice), and through initiations. Another Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> proverb says: <span class="small">&#8216;</span>Bit by bit we eat the head of the rat,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> meaning that we should be patient in the work of remaking ourselves.</p>
<p class="indent">We might conceive of <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> as a compass. If it is badly made, it will lead us in the wrong direction, whilst a good consciousness will always point us towards the right choices. The compass of <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> comes with intuition, and intuition is a silent frequency that opens a double way between you and the source.</p>
<p class="indent">If<span class="small">&#225;</span> tells that he went to the market to search for a spouse for Or<span class="small">&#237;</span> and there he found <span class="small">&#200;</span>m<span class="small">&#237;</span> (breath/soul). Or<span class="small">&#237;</span> married <span class="small">&#200;</span>m<span class="small">&#237;</span> and placed her in his heart. <i><span class="small">&#200;</span>m<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> is also the Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> word used to designate a specific person, someone with a substance and an essence. <i><span class="small">&#200;</span>m<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> was placed in the heart that rests in <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span></i> (the chest), and the chest refers both to armour and also to friendship. <i><span class="small">&#192;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span></i> is the field used to embrace someone in the bonds of friendship so that our heart can meet with theirs. <i><span class="small">&#192;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span></i> is a spiritual force in its own right, the spirit of friendship.</p>
<p class="indent">From the chest stretch forth our arms, known as <i>ow<span class="small">&#243;</span></i>, a word that is similar to <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>w<span class="small">&#243;</span></i>, (abundance) and <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>w<span class="small">&#242;</span><span class="small">&#242;</span>w<span class="small">&#243;</span></i> (a gathering, accumulation). The hands reach from the heart with the power of abundance. With our hands we can give and take abundance. From the lower torso stretch forth our legs (<i>ese</i>), the power of strength and endurance in pursuing our direction and path. The legs are connected to <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>d<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> (the buttocks), which remind us of the need to rest, and how much better our rest is in companionship, where two halves meet to make a common solid resting place.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_23"></a>The body becomes a symbol of the importance of gathering together in harmony, just as our body is assembled harmoniously. Our material manifestation, as a spiritual being in an ensouled body, requires a path, a goal, a detour, rest, experience and friendship. It all makes part of this harmonious gathering, as threats to harmony offer us the chance to value what we have and to make the right choices. Everything that happens can be used in the service of the right decision, if we allow it to be used in such a way. If we resist the good choice, we always have the option to return, which If<span class="small">&#225;</span> calls <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#250;</span>nw<span class="small">&#225;</span></i>.</p>
<p class="h3"><span class="testing">&#x00ee;</span>w<span class="testing">&#224;</span> and <span class="testing">&#224;</span>t<span class="testing">&#250;</span>nw<span class="testing">&#225;</span></p>
<p class="indent"><i><span class="small">&#192;</span>t<span class="small">&#250;</span>nw<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> is the idea of reincarnation, literally <span class="small">&#8216;</span>rebirth of character.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> The idea of rebirth is represented by the fourth of the sixteen major <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span>s</i>, <i><span class="small">&#210;</span>d<span class="small">&#237;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i>. This <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> represents the uterus and the miracle of birth. Again we see the importance of the female, of woman, for birth and rebirth. <i><span class="small">&#210;</span>d<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> also speaks of the destruction of what is useless and the emergence of the new, the good and the blessed <span class="small">&#8211;</span> for we are all born good and blessed. The path away from embracing our happy destiny comes into play as we are subject to socialisation, directly or indirectly, by materialistic values in a spiritually degenerate world.</p>
<p class="indent">A rebirth commonly occurs in the family-line by descent from the father or the mother, but since the compound, or village, is considered as an extended family, reincarnation also occurs within this greater fold and is then considered to be caused by <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>. We see here the logical sociological consequence that arises from family being formed both of blood children and through adoption.</p>
<p class="indent">The purpose of reincarnation, to descend from our heavenly home in <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>run to journey a lifespan on earth, is to enjoy the mystery of life. <i>Agb<span class="small">&#243;</span> at<span class="small">&#242;</span></i> (long life) is a blessing, because as we journey through life we will grow wiser, our unruly <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span></i> will become sweet and good, and we will speak with the voice of our <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i>. Long life allows us to grow wise in the mystery of being, and with wisdom comes happiness through understanding that life is pleasurable. Friends, prestige, money, a good home and a good name, a good marriage, children and comfort are all consequences of rewarding work and the active pursuit of good character. We must realise the path that destiny has prepared for us in order to receive all possible blessings.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_24"></a>If<span class="small">&#225;</span> says the goal is the same <span class="small">&#8211;</span> happiness and contentment <span class="small">&#8211;</span> but the way to attain it is determined by the uniqueness of the path we chose to walk on earth. This is revealed through the naming ceremony, <i>es<span class="small">&#232;</span>nt<span class="small">&#224;</span>y<span class="small">&#232;</span></i>, which is usually performed on the third day after birth. By utilizing the oracular wisdom of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>, the destiny of the child is revealed; and recommendations on how to conduct life in order to live well in the world are given, along with matters concerning professions and the various procedures for atonement of supra-natural powers so the roads can be clear and open. How different this is from the modern rebellious and antinomian ways in which man looks inward to seek whatever he believes himself to be. Compare that to the traditional worldview of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, where you turn towards the source for guidance in the mystery of life and discover the tools for making your fate your own.</p>
<p class="h3"><span class="testing"><span class="testing">&#242;</span></span><small>R</small><span class="testing"><span class="testing">&#236;</span></span><span class="testing">&#7779;</span><span class="testing">&#224;</span>: shards of consciousness</p>
<p class="indent"><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> is a term that has been subject to many interpretations. The word itself is clear in meaning, a <span class="small">&#8216;</span>shard of consciousness.<span class="small">&#8217;</span></p>
<p class="indent">One story from the If<span class="small">&#225;</span> corpus speaks of how <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>, when he was bringing the calabash of creation to earth, came down to the first mountain. He descended along a golden chain, but stumbled as he hit the summit of the mountain, and the calabash of creation broke into 201 pieces. From these shards <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> took shape as a unique <span class="small">&#8211;</span> and limited <span class="small">&#8211;</span> manifestation of the divine plethora.</p>
<p class="indent">On an almost primitive level of metaphysical constitution, this is what <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> is: specific and singular divine potencies, that are awakened as they hit Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span> (the earth), and spark forth a particular form of divine fire. The spark constitutes the core of every ensouled material manifestation, beasts, humans, minerals, trees, and other natural phenomena. This idea of shared consciousness is crucial for understanding If<span class="small">&#225;</span> philosophy and cosmology. Since everything that is partakes of a shared divine fire, everything is divine. We might read pantheism or animism into this as much as a qualified monism. These philosophical discourses are actually of less importance in relation to divine sparks continually encountering other divine sparks, because everything possesses <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i>, consciousness. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is a philosophy about shared commonality and divinity; everything holds the divine fire within, whether strong or weak in its flickering dance.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_25"></a>When the calabash of creation fell to the ground, we also learn that 200 shards took form at the right side, but one shard took form at the left. This dynamic is replicated in our hands, the left being a symbol of restriction, force and protection, and the right being a symbol of gratitude, welcome and blessing. The two hands demonstrate our capacity to rend and gather. We find in the hands, the eyes, the legs, the ears and the buttocks a reminder of the importance of unity and also the power we hold in being authors of fortune and misfortune, dispersion and gathering. This idea is encoded in one of the many interpretations of the word <i><span class="small">&#232;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span>n</i>.</p>
<p class="indent"><i><span class="small">&#200;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span>n</i> is one of the terms used to describe humans <span class="small">&#8211;</span> but also witches <span class="small">&#8211;</span> in the <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span> <span class="small">&#210;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>nd<span class="small">&#225;</span></i>. <i><span class="small">&#200;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span></i> means <span class="small">&#8216;</span>people<span class="small">&#8217;</span> and <i>y<span class="small">&#224;</span>n</i> defines a capacity for choice or being chosen. In other words, If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is clear that man came to earth with the free will to choose what is good or what is bad, although the term <i><span class="small">&#232;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span>n</i> implies the act of choice as much as being chosen. It implies that humans were chosen to take this journey because they were elected to do good and to recognize the shards of divine consciousness dispersed everywhere and thence gather together in harmony.</p>
<p class="indent">As the body of the tree or that of a mountain houses a divine spark of consciousness, so too does our human body. It is a sacred house for the divine fire taking on a unique form. Since everything shares the same divine matter, our very constitution invites and enables us to learn from plants, trees, beasts and spirits. In these we see our own richness, or lack; and work on our perfection. When we witness everything as divine rays moving, forming benevolent and malevolent relations in an emotionally detached, but interested, approach to the world, we cease to judge and simply experience. We will be like stars and trees, secure in their consciousness; mountains of integrity and goodness that spread stability and give welcome to the world. The goal is to become <i>awo</i>, the embodiment of secrets that knows the matrix and helix of consciousness and being. Possessing <i>awo</i> will enable us to proceed towards our destiny with dignity and measured movement. We experience <i>awo</i> by mediating <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> and <i><span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i>, the ideas and the force by which we accomplish these ideas. The only <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#7885;</span>l<span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> who held both these powers was <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>, the king dressed in white. He is the spiritual force bringing with him ideas, dreams and the <i><span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i>, the force to make it a reality. He carried the calabash of creation to earth and brought forth all <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> from the storehouse of divine wisdom, the still state of being and all possibilities of <a id="page_26"></a>expression we know as Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span>. There are no shrines or groves dedicated to Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span>. We can pray to him, as a statement of our axis, an a<span class="small">&#64259;</span>rmation of recognition, but it will be like whispers touching fog. Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span> is the origin of all, but is different from everything that is, and because of this he is the pole that generates any landscape, known or mysterious to us.</p>
<p class="indent">In order for every sentient being to know its origins, it needs to reconnect with everything that is, in all its possible variations: trees, beasts, plants <span class="small">&#8211;</span> or, even more challengingly, other human beings. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> teaches that if a thing exists it serves a purpose. If we become agitated or annoyed we lose wisdom, and in so doing we enter into the crossroads of <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> where choices have to be made. These choices can go with us or against us, challenge wisdom or feed it. We need this contrast in our life. We need the dagger soaked in honey as much as we need the kiss glossed in vinegar, because wherever we see evil, goodness is around the corner, and whenever we embrace goodness we should stay in the embrace of love. This will deflect all negativity.</p>
<p class="indent">We are shards of divine consciousness walking the earth. With our birth we set the earth aflame with a given energy. We open the door to a divine experience, being born as good and blessed souls embarking on a journey that can at times be confusing or challenging, but always rewarding provided we choose the good. We repeatedly come to the crossroads of choice <span class="small">&#8211;</span> some of us turn into warriors and interpret everything as situations, while others interpret this condition as slaves, others still as regents. From this point we can understand what we are, and what we are not, in a spirit of invitation and interest as we gently reject the negative and gladly invite the positive. Your life is about you and your accomplishments. It is about how you embrace and love the world, and here we find the concept of <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>. <i><span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> is you. <i><span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> is god. <i><span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> holds a unique and limited shard of the divine consciousness which serves as a mirror for your becoming and enables your own god making which is mediated by possessing <i>awo</i>.</p>
<p class="indent">The number of <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> coming to Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span> was 17. This number is significant as 17 represents the principle of multiplication in If<span class="small">&#225;</span> cosmology, and it was this power that the earth attracted to herself. It is the number of <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> and of his mother, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un, a constant reminder that <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> came to earth to help man to choose good, to choose sweetness. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> really has no hierarchy as such <span class="small">&#8211;</span> apart from the head, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>; and tail, <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> <span class="small">&#8211;</span> which form the ouroboros that encapsulates creation. The head is the gentle mediator of all things, signified by the two eyes in the <a id="page_27"></a>snake<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s head and its forked tongue. It is further represented by the boa constrictor sacred to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>. <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> is the tail, the crossroads that starts a renewed cycle, or leads you into the wilderness to enter the body of creation from an unexpected direction, a challenge that propels you forward or into resistance.</p>
<p class="indent">If<span class="small">&#225;</span> sees everything that exists as emanations from a single field of diffuse or mysterious being, referred to as Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span>, the name given to the force that rests in the invisible realms as a quiet storehouse of light. As mentioned earlier, the Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> concept of god is noetic and in line with Plotinus <span class="small">&#8211;</span> but also with Proclus<span class="small">&#8217;</span> Neoplatonism. Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span> is ever concealed, ever a mystery. This mystery can be experienced in shards of beauty throughout creation, in the visible and invisible worlds. Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span> is the creative power, the heat of divine potential and light. It is the owner of the womb that gives forth snakes (boas or pythons) in the form of <i><span class="small">&#242;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>m<span class="small">&#224;</span>r<span class="small">&#233;</span></i>, the rainbow. It is Ol<span class="small">&#242;</span>run <span class="small">&#192;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>, the owner of the cloth of light in the invisible realm; and <span class="small">&#7864;</span>l<span class="small">&#x0276;</span>d<span class="small">&#225;</span>a, the one who allows life to flow forth from its third eye. Its power is supported by its firstborn principles, <i>s<span class="small">&#249;</span><span class="small">&#250;</span>r<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> (patience), and <i><span class="small">&#x0275;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span></i> (wisdom/purity), through which it made all that we can conceive of possible, whether in dreams or as an extension of consciousness in motion.</p>
<p class="indent">These powers known as <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> emanate from <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#7885;</span>l<span class="small">&#7865;</span></i>, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>spirits of the houses of light,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> which came to earth with the specific task of making it a habitat in conformity with the social spirit of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>nil<span class="small">&#233;</span>. Sixteen powers in particular were crucial for the construction of the earth and everything upon it, including mankind. We should understand 16 not as a fixed amount, but rather a quality related to the power of multiplication. This mindset is further a<span class="small">&#64259;</span>rmed when If<span class="small">&#225;</span> reveals that at the beginning of time, when Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span> became an ensouled planet, spirits came from the right and the left. Of these spirits, 201 came from the left and are associated with strength and malefica, whilst 401 came from the right, representing benevolence and good fortune. These numbers reveal that the forces of fortune will always outnumber those of misfortune.</p>
<p class="indent">From the left, the side of strength, only one <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> came forth, and this was <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n. The remainder of the spiritual forces coming from the left were spirits detrimental to human wellbeing. These are considered to be the necessary arsenal of defences available to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>nil<span class="small">&#233;</span>, with <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n serving as a stabilising force amidst all these spirits of obstacle and grief.</p>
<p class="indent">From the left, we have the spirits known as <i>ajog<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i>, <i>el<span class="small">&#233;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span>n<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> and <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#x0276;</span></i>, which include such phenomena as <i><span class="small">&#232;</span>gb<span class="small">&#224;</span></i> (paralysis), <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>f<span class="small">&#242;</span></i> (loss), <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>r<span class="small">&#249;</span>n</i> (disease), <i>ik<span class="small">&#250;</span></i> (death), <a id="page_28"></a><i><span class="small">&#232;</span>p<span class="small">&#232;</span></i> (curses), <i>ese</i> (a<span class="small">&#64260;</span>iction) and many more. This doesn<span class="small">&#8217;</span>t mean that Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span> designed a world where the battle between good and evil is constantly enacted; rather the necessity of radical contrast in generating a field of experience. In other words, to enable creation, contrast and opposition are essential. This necessary polarity is found in the simple binary of 0 and 1, absence and presence, night and day: from these general principles, it extends into a multiplicity of forms. The godhead dwells in this atmosphere of contemplation and mystery.</p>
<p class="indent">Since these hostile forces are the result of a cosmic necessity that supports creation, it is important to understand how to engineer one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s life in such a way that they can be absent from it, yet present in the world. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> states throughout its corpus that the absence of malefica is accomplished by developing good character, accumulating wisdom and patience, being respectful towards one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s ancestors and interested in one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s environment. Hence the presence of malefica invites the understanding of them as forces that tempt us and help us to make the right and proper choices.</p>
<p class="indent">In order to accumulate wisdom, we need to understand the myriad forms that have consciousness, and so it is proper to look more closely at some of the well known <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i>, because they reveal the energetic condition of the world and of human beings.</p>
<p class="indent">Amongst the first sixteen <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i> of importance for our world we find <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>, <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span>, <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya, Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, <span class="small">&#7884;</span>bal<span class="small">&#250;</span>way<span class="small">&#233;</span>, Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun/Aj<span class="small">&#233;</span> <span class="small">&#7778;</span>aluga, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un and <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>, all of whom represent important powers related to creation. These potencies are also related to the establishment of the Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> Empire and its original 16 city states with the <i>oni</i> (king) of Il<span class="small">&#233;</span> If<span class="small">&#x0275;</span> representing the axis of these mystical dimensions. This complex is illustrated by the many stories in the If<span class="small">&#225;</span> corpus which speak of the fortunes and misfortunes of the various <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i> during their journey in Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span>. They teach us what kinds of situations and energies one should avoid, and how to integrate the lessons of life in order to transform misfortune into fortune. It should also be mentioned that these stories tell of people who manifested these qualities in their lives and thus set an example for posterity. By becoming familiar with the stories and teachings of spirits, men, animals, trees and plants, we increase our own knowledge, and we pay attention and respect to our ancestry and environment.</p>
<p class="indent">We will now look more closely at <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>, who made dry land and the body of everything that would hold a soul. We will also look at <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, who made roads <a id="page_29"></a>throughout the earth and forged the spine and skeleton in man and animals; at <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya, the mother of wind, and the fiery <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span>. The fertile and sweet waters of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un will be commented upon, as will the capacity for sickness and healing held by <span class="small">&#7884;</span>bal<span class="small">&#250;</span>way<span class="small">&#233;</span> and the secrets of medicine possessed by <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n. Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, the bones of ancestry, and the crossroads of tradition will be considered, as well as the watery complex of Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun, Aj<span class="small">&#233;</span> <span class="small">&#7778;</span>aluga, Osup<span class="small">&#225;</span>, and Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja; and before I conclude the presentation of <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i> I will, of course, talk of <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>.</p>
<p class="h3"><span class="testing">&#x025A;</span>b<span class="testing">&#224;</span>t<span class="testing">&#225;</span>l<span class="testing">&#225;</span>: the source of consciousness</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> is often referred to as the king of <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i>. His spiritual force was the bridge that brought consciousness and form to creation. As such, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> is equated with consciousness itself, specifically a calm and cool consciousness. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> is an extension of the spiritual power known as <i>s<span class="small">&#249;</span><span class="small">&#250;</span>r<span class="small">&#249;</span></i>, patience, and <i>s<span class="small">&#242;</span>tito</i>, truthfulness and faithfulness. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> has a deep resonance with early life forms; examples include reptiles, snakes, elephants and in particular the snail. The snail not only carries around a house shaped by the golden section in honour of cosmic perfection and wisdom, it is composed of mucus and muscle and represents the stage of creation prior to the forging of the skeleton. The snail prefigures the original form, with its primeval quadripartite brain and serpentine mucus muscle that shapes its body. The white blood of the snail has calmative properties, and the If<span class="small">&#225;</span> corpus tells us that it was the blood of snails which <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> used to calm forces that threatened to wreak catastrophe upon the earth. The snail is also sacred to the <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>m<span class="small">&#x0273;</span>l<span class="small">&#x0275;</span></i> in its condition of perfect calm, that called upon the skeleton and spine to transform the dweller of peace into a determined warrior through the power of <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n. It is when we gained a spine and skeleton that the human journey began from its peaceful and patient original state. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> appears both as a male and a female spirit in the stories of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, depending on the traditions preserved in the different Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> districts. More frequently, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> is seen as the husband of Yem<span class="small">&#242;</span>w<span class="small">&#243;</span>, a spirit of purity attributed to white clay and creativity, she who sculpts the world together with him. Some stories tell that Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja was born from this primordial union, while other traditions say that <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> never had a child of his own; his capacity is the force that made the mystery of ovum and sperm merge, and as such he is the father of <a id="page_30"></a>all, not of anyone in particular. This is a further reference to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> being the spirit who brought consciousness to the world in all its 256 different forms, as expressed in the If<span class="small">&#225;</span> corpus of Od<span class="small">&#249;</span>. Since <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> is the sum of consciousness, we are all, in this sense, his children.</p>
<p class="indent">What might appear as a contradiction in the many stories is how the energy of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> works in our world. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> belongs to a class of spirits known as <i>funfun</i>, which is usually translated as <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the whiteness of white,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> or <span class="small">&#8216;</span>splendour.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> All these spiritual forces are related to ideas of purity, moderation, stability, creativity, and creation, whether in terms of bringing forth ensouled beings or forming a harmonious community. It follows that all the funfun spirits that came to earth became rulers over cities and districts, due to their extraordinary capacities for understanding the fundamental principles of creation and cosmic organisation. <i>Funfun</i> is a reference to what is concealed and mysterious; hence the divergent, and at times contradictory, stories and myths about <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>. The whiteness of the <i>funfun</i> spirits is a field of tranquil peace that is contrasted with <i>d<span class="small">&#250;</span>d<span class="small">&#250;</span></i>, or blackness. <i>D<span class="small">&#250;</span>d<span class="small">&#250;</span></i> refers to what is concealed, and it is this that the <i>funfun</i> spirits reveal in the form of a mystery. As such, we can understand <i>funfun</i> to be a force that reveals itself little by little, and thus carries the admonition that stability and peacefulness are necessary preconditions to make positive use of the revelation of the mystery. Glimpsed here are the metaphysical dimensions that bring forth day from night and a child from the womb. In addition to <i>funfun</i> and <i>d<span class="small">&#250;</span>d<span class="small">&#250;</span></i> is <i>awon pupa</i>, the mystery of redness. <i>Awon pupa</i> represents spiritual forces of fire and fierceness and is related to the blood, to the passions, and is the principle that actively infuses any form of germination with power.</p>
<p class="indent">In If<span class="small">&#225;</span> metaphysics the universe is a result of the power of expansion and of contraction. This cosmic pulse is frequently referred to as <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ko</i>, male spirits of whiteness, and <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>bo</i>, female spirits of darkness, a reference to the interplay between <i>imo</i> (light) and <i>aimoy<span class="small">&#233;</span></i> (the darkness needed for manifestation).</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> represents our journey through a world of paradox and mystery, to experience goodness and arrive at the harbour of tranquility. This is made possible by the accumulation of wisdom and understanding, as we cultivate our character and gradually increase our awareness, not only of ourselves, but of how we are connected to everything in this web of wonders.</p>
<p class="indent1"><a id="page_31"></a><i><span class="small">&#192;</span>d<span class="small">&#250;</span>r<span class="small">&#225;</span> <span class="small">&#x025A;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l&aacute;</i></p>
<table cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" class="table">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> yemi</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>, look upon me with favour</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Ni mo se da funfun</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>It is because of this you dress in white</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> yemi</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>, look upon me with favour</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Ni mo se da funfun</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>It is because of this you dress in white</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Sebi aso iyi</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>It is because of this he/she is renowned</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Ohun le um sode i gbele</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>It is what you use to start the festivities</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#192;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span> igben</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Costly garment</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Ohun le um sode i gbele</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>It was he/she you would use to start the festivities</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Alagbada elewu et<span class="small">&#249;</span></i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Owner of the dress of the guinea fowl</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Esama sotito</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>They do only good</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span> mi gbemi o</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>My <span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> looks upon me with favour</i></p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="h3"><span class="testing"><span class="testing">&#242;</span></span>g<span class="testing">&#250;</span>n: the fiery one who made the path</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n holds paramount importance in Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> cosmology because of his capacity to bring the <i>awon pupa</i> (the red mystery) to earth in the particular way necessary for the evolution and sustainability of every ensouled thing. He has mastery of iron and fire and is a blacksmith, a warrior and patron of hunters.</p>
<p class="indent">He is represented by the colour red, but more so by deep blue, which typifies the hottest part of a flame. He gives form to the fire itself, as revealed in the power of iron tamed by it. Iron is represented by the staff that can be bent into form, and iron is the vital component in blood, making <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n the author of the skeleton and of the blood. <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n is the force that keeps everything alive with vital essence, determination and motion.</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n is the only <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> who came from the left side, hence his capacity to exercise dominion over the energies that comprise its malevolent forces. <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n is the spiritual intelligence who knows how to forge this overflow of sizzling energies into structures and paths; he is, correspondingly, the impulse for war, copulation and aggression. He is the force at play when the farmer ploughs his field and opens the earth to plant his seeds, as much as he is that which moves revolution, the military and the bloodlust of a killer seeking some form of justice. Even if he represents the control of this energy, the energy he controls is not so <a id="page_32"></a>easily managed by individuals. In this way <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n represents the force of fire and determination present in a society.</p>
<p class="indent">Whilst If<span class="small">&#225;</span> speaks of the descent of spiritual forces to the earth in several <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span>s</i>, in <i><span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>nd<span class="small">&#225;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i> we are told specifically of the manifestation of <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n on earth and the organisation of human society. There are at least four variations of this story, and they all express the same principles. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> tells us that all the roads on earth were made by a spiritual force known as Tob<span class="small">&#237;</span> Ode, whose name means <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the hunter who possesses great skill.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> Before the success of Tob<span class="small">&#237;</span> Ode, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> made an attempt to clear paths so that the visible and invisible realms would be able to converge. He made a knife of silver and started to cut his way through the woods and wilderness. He managed to cut under the bushes to liberate roots and create some space, but when it came to the more di<span class="small">&#64259;</span>cult clearing of the brush, the silver knife became bent and broken. Through this action, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> inspired the roots of all plants with the power of dreams, and made communication with them possible. Realising that a stronger metal was necessary, he called upon Tob<span class="small">&#237;</span> Ode, who possessed the power of iron, to clear the paths between the visible and invisible realms, and he succeeded in doing so.</p>
<p class="indent">The accomplishments of Tob<span class="small">&#237;</span> Ode made possible the arrival of <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i> and other spiritual forces to Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span>; he was honoured, celebrated and elected to be king of the city of Ire. He was renamed <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n Olor<span class="small">&#237;</span>, meaning <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the power of iron owns the head,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> alluding to his absolute supremacy over all living beings.  <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n refused these honours, and went to the forest of mystery. He journeyed through it to the mountain where <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> was resting in dream and contemplation. In <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s absence, the population became unruly and quarrelsome, and it didn<span class="small">&#8217;</span>t take long before he was called back to the city to restore order. He came down from the mountain and out of the forest, painted with <i>efun</i> (white chalk) and dressed in <i>m<span class="small">&#224;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#242;</span></i> (palm fronds) in honour of the true king of whiteness and woods, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>. As a forest lord, in the image of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>, he entered the city of Ire and brought an end to all the hostile and negative forces. Yet again he was hailed as a king with the name Onir<span class="small">&#233;</span>, meaning <span class="small">&#8216;</span>king of good fortune.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> From Ire, <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n went from city to city, reinstating order, harmony and good fortune, until he came to Il<span class="small">&#233;</span> If<span class="small">&#x0275;</span>, where he set down his crown of kingship and placed a crown of iron upon his head, departing to the woods to wait for new adventures and new stages in the world<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s development.</p>
<p class="indent">Here in the woods, <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n established the first society, the <span class="small">&#7864;</span>gb<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span> Ode, the hunters<span class="small">&#8217;</span> <a id="page_33"></a>society that became the model for many others, and also founded the <span class="small">&#7884;</span>gb<span class="small">&#x0273;</span>ni society. In his capacity as a founding father of a closed society, he can be seen as the instigator of all forms of society, as well as of social advancements in the ebb and flow of civilisation. For the Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> people, civilisation is moved by the same powers that influence hunters <span class="small">&#8211;</span> society reflects their social needs and vice versa. This is evident in the succession of chiefs in the hunters<span class="small">&#8217;</span> society. <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n was the patriarch, followed by <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#115;</span><span class="small">&#x0273;</span><span class="small">&#x025A;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#236;</span>, Ol<span class="small">&#242;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n Ed<span class="small">&#233;</span>, and Erinl<span class="small">&#232;</span>/Inl<span class="small">&#233;</span>.</p>
<p class="indent">As the patriarch of hunters, <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n had an intense relationship with the powers of misfortune and unrest, <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#x0276;</span></i> and <i>ajog<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i>, and in particular with <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>nil<span class="small">&#233;</span>, the spirit of the earth, and together they share a veneration <span class="small">&#8211;</span> and taste <span class="small">&#8211;</span> for black dogs. In several Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> traditions, dogs, especially female dogs, are regarded as guardians and messengers of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>nil<span class="small">&#233;</span>, given their loyalty and capacity for seeing both the visible and invisible worlds.</p>
<p class="indent">After <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#x0273;</span><span class="small">&#x025A;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#236;</span> was the next chief of the hunters<span class="small">&#8217;</span> society, and in him we see a refinement of the customs of the hunt. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#x0273;</span><span class="small">&#x025A;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#236;</span> is attributed with the power of astral travel for the purpose of tracking down prey. He is also associated with the bow and arrow. While <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n needed proximity to the target, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#x0273;</span><span class="small">&#x025A;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#236;</span> could hunt his prey from a distance and with him came all forms of clever snares and traps. This advancement continued with the next chief, Ol<span class="small">&#242;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n Ed<span class="small">&#233;</span>, the sorcerer from Ed<span class="small">&#233;</span> city who is reputed to have introduced magic and new ideas into the concept of the hunt. Ol<span class="small">&#242;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n Ed<span class="small">&#233;</span> is usually represented with a medicine bag in his hands; this reveals a relationship with <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n, the owner of herbs and medicine, and additionally the use of poisons.</p>
<p class="indent">After him Erinl<span class="small">&#232;</span> makes his appearance, representing the healing aspect of the hunter and the fisherman. Both Ol<span class="small">&#242;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n Ed<span class="small">&#233;</span> and Erinl<span class="small">&#232;</span> have strong ties to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un who, in several myths, is said to be the mother of them both. The entrance of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un into the development of the hunters<span class="small">&#8217;</span> mystery also brings <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>, her son, and with them we see the social layers represented by the advances in the hunters<span class="small">&#8217;</span> society providing a model of social evolution. Regarding these four powers, we can conceive of the social rhythm of a society or a civilization as ruled by the following principles: the power of <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, manifested through iron and smithing, clears the roads and makes the necessary structures for growth. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#x0273;</span><span class="small">&#x025A;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#236;</span> enters the social design with focus and determination to develop the existing structures; as such, he represents the order achieved in a society by its population. Next, a creative element enters in the form of Ol<span class="small">&#242;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n Ed<span class="small">&#233;</span>, an enthusiasm and <a id="page_34"></a>volatility that is resolved in a dance between poison and medicine, in which Erinl<span class="small">&#232;</span>, the owner of medicines and remedies, steps in as a stabilising influence.</p>
<p class="indent">We need to understand that a society is born because of the efforts of <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n. <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n came from the left side, which demonstrates that both benevolent and malefic forces are necessary for the motion of a society that we perceive as progress. The key is to follow his example and dress in <i>efun</i> (whiteness) and <i>m<span class="small">&#224;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#242;</span></i>, to acknowledge the peaceful nature of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> as being the force that should inform every social advance. <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n is the honeyed sword as much as the bitter aftertaste in a sweet victory. Fundamentally he is the force that made the substance of life possible, as this <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span>k<span class="small">&#236;</span></i> imparts:</p>
<p class="indent1"><i>Or<span class="small">&#237;</span>k<span class="small">&#236;</span> <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i></p>
<table cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" class="table">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> b<span class="small">&#237;</span> <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>There is no divinity that equals <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>A ko roko</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Without <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>A ko y<span class="small">&#232;</span>n<span class="small">&#224;</span></i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>We would not clear the weed and woods</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n lo ni ok<span class="small">&#243;</span></i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Without <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n no path would be clear</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n l<span class="small">&#224;</span>gb<span class="small">&#232;</span>de</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>The hoe belongs to <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n l<span class="small">&#224;</span>gb<span class="small">&#232;</span> oun naa ni jag<span class="small">&#249;</span>n jag<span class="small">&#249;</span>n</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n is the blacksmith</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>B<span class="small">&#237;</span> o s<span class="small">&#237;</span> <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n a ko jeun</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n is the farmer and the warrior</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><span class="small">&#160;</span></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Without <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n we would not have food</i></p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="h3"><span class="testing">&#7885;</span>ya: the white wind that feeds a thousand fires</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya is the wind, and as the wind is constantly changing so she is the power behind change. Her name is probably an elision of <i>o <span class="small">&#236;</span>y<span class="small">&#225;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>san</i>, meaning <span class="small">&#8216;</span>Mother of nine.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> This epithet refers to the nine children she begot with <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span>. The first eight were mute, but the ninth spoke with an outlandishly high pitched voice. This was Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, the others being the eight winds. As the mistress of the winds, she has an important function in how society changes, and the wanton and flickering ways of the human mind and desire. Just as the wind can take the form of breeze, storm and tornado, mimicking the stages in our life, it also mirrors the force inherent in a given society that moves between breeze and storm, pleasantness and destruction.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_35"></a><span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya is a warrior spirit, having her origin in the Niger river, and is often depicted as a fierce Amazon. Several songs and prayers to her state that she is to be feared far more than her husbands, <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n and <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span>, as her <span class="small">&#8216;</span>cutlass made of wind kills more than any sword<span class="small">&#8217;</span> (see her <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i>, <i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i>).</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya is a mysterious force of nature, present when the wind stirs up and presages the thunder. She is the wind that feeds fire and the force that excites passions. An object in rapid movement will generate heat, and thus the movement of <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya generates heat and fire, resulting in the atmospheric conditions that makes the thunderbolt possible. She is the wind that dresses in fire, because she is what controls, soothes, and excites it. But wind, the aerial element, is a reference to the spiritual domain, as the corporeality of spirits is formed of air. This association tells us that Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, the collective memory of ancestry, is the wind within the earth, and this is why he speaks with a wind-like high pitched voice.</p>
<p class="indent">This is the dance of <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya in the world. Her praise names are (amongst many): <i><span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya Orire</i>: <span class="small">&#8216;</span>She whose beauty is so great we cannot look away<span class="small">&#8217;</span>; <i><span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya Oriri</i>: <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the charming one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>; <i>Af<span class="small">&#233;</span>f<span class="small">&#233;</span> l<span class="small">&#232;</span>l<span class="small">&#232;</span></i>: <span class="small">&#8216;</span>Great Wind<span class="small">&#8217;</span>; <i>Af<span class="small">&#232;</span>f<span class="small">&#233;</span> ik<span class="small">&#250;</span></i>: <span class="small">&#8216;</span>Winds of death.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> She is also <i>Af<span class="small">&#233;</span>f<span class="small">&#233;</span> l<span class="small">&#233;</span>g<span class="small">&#233;</span>-leg<span class="small">&#233;</span> t<span class="small">&#237;</span> <span class="small">&#237;</span> d<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#8217;</span>gi l<span class="small">&#8217;</span>ok<span class="small">&#232;</span>-l<span class="small">&#8217;</span>ok<span class="small">&#232;</span></i>: <span class="small">&#8216;</span>The wind that severs the treetops<span class="small">&#8217;</span> and <i><span class="small">&#204;</span>y<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>m<span class="small">&#237;</span> arina bora b<span class="small">&#237;</span> aso</i>: <span class="small">&#8216;</span>My mother who dresses in fire.<span class="small">&#8217;</span></p>
<p class="indent">The wind is the portent of empyrean wisdom. It is here we find the link between ancestral wisdom and what is hidden within the earth as a reflex of the original celestial wisdom. The stars are always right beneath our feet. This is why we bow our heads to the ground and ask <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>nil<span class="small">&#233;</span> for what we need to stay strong and ardent. The one who listens is Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, the ancestral memory, the subterrestrial wind. Wind upon wind, layer upon layer, nine in all, forms the dress worn by <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya. <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya cuts the treetops because the trees are our ancestors, and she descends upon the crown of trees as divine inspiration. Her womb is the gateway of wisdom. She is the wisdom that flashes through the sky and ignites immediate understanding. She is the wisdom that makes us humble and, in humility, we fall to the ground. As we lie there with the ancestral winds murmuring beneath our backs, she flashes in the storms above us. She is the wisdom that touches everything with invisible hands and sets minds, hearts and the world aflame with passion. This is why <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> desperately needs her. He needs the spark of empyrean inspiration to accompany his thunderous presence.</p>
<p class="indent">She is the wind of death and thus she is divine justice, just as <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> is the most ghastly of deaths, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the white death,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> because when the sweet breeze turns <a id="page_36"></a>into a tornado, devastation is as unavoidable as it is when the whiteness of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> scorches the earth with radioactive rays.</p>
<p class="indent">She is the wisdom of equilibrium resting upon the shoulders of Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n. She is the womb that invigorates the earth and wind to speak its wisdom, because the wind carries seeds and pollen everywhere and is the unruly force that can shift fortune from one hand to another, from one nation to another. As one <i>orin</i> says:</p>
<table cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" class="table">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#201;</span> <span class="small">&#233;</span> <span class="small">&#232;</span> p<span class="small">&#224;</span>!</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Oh <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya o</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Oh, Magnificent <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>H<span class="small">&#233;</span><span class="small">&#232;</span> pa ri p<span class="small">&#224;</span> <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya o</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Oh Great Ancestor spirit who lives in the wind</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>E<span class="small">&#233;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n nl<span class="small">&#225;</span> in<span class="small">&#250;</span> af<span class="small">&#233;</span>f<span class="small">&#233;</span></i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Oh great <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>H<span class="small">&#233;</span><span class="small">&#232;</span> p<span class="small">&#224;</span> r<span class="small">&#237;</span> pa <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya o</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>The great orisa</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>O<span class="small">&#242;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span> nl<span class="small">&#225;</span> <span class="small">&#242;</span></i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> of excellence</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>O<span class="small">&#242;</span>s<span class="small">&#224;</span> t<span class="small">&#243;</span> t<span class="small">&#243;</span>bi</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Who kills without moving herself</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>A pani ma n<span class="small">&#225;</span>g<span class="small">&#224;</span></i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Who supports her husband</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>T<span class="small">&#237;</span><span class="small">&#237;</span> t<span class="small">&#8217;</span><span class="small">&#243;</span>ko re l<span class="small">&#233;</span>y<span class="small">&#236;</span>n o</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Support us</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Omo r<span class="small">&#232;</span> l<span class="small">&#225;</span> nse</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>We are your children, enflame us</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#192;</span>wa loloya</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>We are your children</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya wa, ti wa l<span class="small">&#233;</span>y<span class="small">&#236;</span>n o</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>We cultivate <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>E e e h<span class="small">&#232;</span><span class="small">&#232;</span>p<span class="small">&#224;</span> o</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Oya that is ours, support us</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Heepa!</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>E e heepa o!</i></p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="h3"><span class="testing">&#x00a0;</span><span class="testing">&#224;</span>ng<span class="testing">&#243;</span>: the twain sword of justice</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> is a spirit associated with thunder. He was the fourth ruler of <span class="small">&#7884;</span>y<span class="small">&#7885;</span> state; his rule was one of military and structural excellence and his kingdom prospered in woodcarving and wisdom. Under him <span class="small">&#7884;</span>y<span class="small">&#7885;</span> state became renowned for its excellence in organization and trade as well as in violence and horror.</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> is red in colour and is related to politics, water, and women. <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya, the wind that stirs up the passions, chose him as her ideal husband, while she herself is a power resting within the white cloth of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>. As we saw in the case of <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n and what is implied in <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya, all red forces that possess su<span class="small">&#64259;</span>cient understanding will realise that they need to venerate the whiteness of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> and thus <a id="page_37"></a>submit their fiery passions to calm and clear mediation and evaluation. While <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n is supported by the darkness from which he came, in his red force seeking whiteness <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> does not have this kind of fundamental cosmic support. With <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> we find a man born in ancestral memory who rises to godhood. It is in <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> that we find the divine state of humans, as spiritual beings on a journey to retrieve their divinity. <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> is a perfect example of the human condition, and in particular the nature of politics here in Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span>. <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> is the lightning, and by this he demonstrates himself as someone who recognises their celestial origin. We are all born from the flashes of light and fire, the red expressions that give life to everything. It is with the flash of lightning that we gain a soul, and from this we develop our personality within the social climate it finds itself. Edwards and Mason say the following about <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span>:</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent">Lightning also symbolises his tongue, and it is his tongue which distinguishes the truth and the lie. The tongue enables <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> to live life on either side of reality; on the side of truth or on the side of the lie. He is an <span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span> of opposites and is represented as honest and dishonest, stingy and generous, kind and ruthless. (1985: 54)</p>
</div>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> is a complex force who constantly strives to maintain a balance, which is symbolised by his double-headed axe. The spirit that inspired him was one of wealth, equality, and abundance, but in a world of contradiction the simple can become complicated. This is encoded in the persona of <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span>, who began as a determined, kind and just ruler who, upon perceiving the wealth flocking towards him, also saw the birds of doom and paranoia following in its wake. This led to demonstrations of violent and depraved power towards the end of his rule.</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> was removed from royal o<span class="small">&#64259;</span>ce by the <span class="small">&#204;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span>m<span class="small">&#237;</span> society. The same society of wise women that had crowned him ordered him to commit suicide, as was the customary verdict passed on any king who was dethroned for ruthlessness. Various myths tell us that he realised the entire condition and purpose of his life as he strolled around the woods, and that he committed suicide in a state of clarity and acceptance. This enabled his transition from human to <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> and made it possible for him to undergo the transition in whiteness and peace of mind.</p>
<p class="indent">I would say that <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> represents the ideal of human aspiration; he is the good spirit who wants everyone to prosper, as much as he is the lone wanderer <a id="page_38"></a>seeking abundance for himself. He is the <i>ed<span class="small">&#250;</span>n <span class="small">&#224;</span>r<span class="small">&#225;</span></i>, the thunderstone, and is as such the lightning flash of divine inspiration and aspiration taking earthly form. <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> is ambivalent, but always focused on assuming the crown of destiny. He is the path all humans follow in pursuit of goals, temporal or eternal. He is not the instigator of battle, but the essence of battle.</p>
<p class="indent">The form of his thunderous manifestation varies. Oramfe seems to be more serene and Janus-like, while both Jakuta and Hevioso seem to be less boastful than the <span class="small">&#7884;</span>y<span class="small">&#7885;</span> representation of the thunder spirit, <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span>. In Il<span class="small">&#233;</span> If<span class="small">&#x0275;</span>, Oramfe is important in the Odun Ose festival dedicated to Omitutu, the deified spirit of cool water. Central to these rituals is the apparition of <span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> Ito, who manifests as the mudfish. The mudfish inhabits two kingdoms at the same time, both water and land, and thus reveals a secret of <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span><span class="small">&#8217;</span>s nature. The same bi-morphic element is found in the nightjar and the <i>ok<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i> (flycatcher)used to represent the spirit of thunder. These suggest the importance of anomaly and change in the animal world and are a reference to ritual and political primacy, representing the presence of difference in the natural scheme of things. And here we encounter the complex field of <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> where mundane politics reflect the order and structure of the perfect cosmic organisation, showing the wicked, weird and mysterious ways that make up all the inherent possibilities in the divine design.</p>
<p class="indent">From <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> we can learn much about the human condition. We see what an excess of fire can do when a self-centeredness is combined with political power. In <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> we find the lesson of humility and the secrets of divine presence upon earth mediated by the wisdom of ancestry and the spirit of our consciousness. <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> brings us the message that we can all gift abundance and wonder to the world as we take the crown of our destiny; equally we can bring devastation and dread when we fail to see the shimmering golden glory of our happy harbour.</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> is a king who ideally dresses in female clothes, not because of his sexuality, but because he knows that woman gave him power, woman can take his power, and that woman sustains his power. He dresses as a woman to give homage to the source of power, because woman is the crown of kingship, and a king who has no support from women is no king. It is a reminder to men to always recognise that they are what they are because of <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i>, that the wisdom of the world belongs to woman. <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> teaches us that there will always be consequences impairing our good fortune when we deviate from what is good, true, and just. <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> represents the fierce warlord obsessed with attack and defence, <a id="page_39"></a>because the sight of blood feeds his fire, although he will always be in need of good and wise teachers and advisors to tame his natural chaos. This being said, <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> is an expansive redness and fire, as is imparted in one <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>seof<span class="small">&#242;</span></i> (enchantment). It is the fire of determination we need to pursue our goals:</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent"><i>S<span class="small">&#225;</span>ng<span class="small">&#237;</span>r<span class="small">&#237;</span>-l<span class="small">&#225;</span>g<span class="small">&#237;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ol<span class="small">&#224;</span>g<span class="small">&#237;</span>r<span class="small">&#237;</span>-k<span class="small">&#224;</span>k<span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>k<span class="small">&#224;</span>-k<span class="small">&#237;</span> igba edun b<span class="small">&#242;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>O j<span class="small">&#225;</span>j<span class="small">&#250;</span> m<span class="small">&#243;</span> n<span class="small">&#237;</span> k<span class="small">&#243;</span> to pa n<span class="small">&#237;</span> j<span class="small">&#233;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#210;</span> k<span class="small">&#233;</span> k<span class="small">&#224;</span>r<span class="small">&#224;</span> k<span class="small">&#233;</span> k<span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#243;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>S<span class="small">&#8217;</span>ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>r<span class="small">&#242;</span> d<span class="small">&#237;</span> j<span class="small">&#236;</span>nj<span class="small">&#236;</span>nn<span class="small">&#236;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>El<span class="small">&#233;</span>yinj<span class="small">&#250;</span> In<span class="small">&#225;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ab<span class="small">&#225;</span> won j<span class="small">&#225;</span> m<span class="small">&#225;</span> j<span class="small">&#232;</span>bi</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Iwo n<span class="small">&#237;</span> mo S<span class="small">&#225;</span> di o</i></p>
<p class="noindent1"><i>That which tears and whips the walls</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>He left the walls torn and placed therein two hundred thunderstones</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>He who looks at people in dread and inspires fright before punishing them</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>He speaks with his entire body</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>He speaks like someone powerful</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>You should have fear in your heart</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>His eyes are red as burning coals</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>The one who fights people but never sees condemnation</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Because no fight is made without justice</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>In him I seek my refuge.</i></p>
</div>
<p class="h3"><span class="testing">&#x025A;</span><span class="testing">&#7779;</span>un: the creative turbulence of a million sweet waters</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un is the archetypical female force; she contains the seed of all possible manifestations. She is saturated in mystery, so rich in essence that we cannot envision the totality of her possibilities. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un is said to be the first female force that came to Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span>. She arrived on earth with honey, sweetness and the secrets of eroticism. The myths and stories about <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un are numerous, but we find a common theme in her being a free spirit who leaves her oppressors and critics when her freedom of expression is hindered. Her absence always brings devastation <a id="page_40"></a>of some sort, because she is the mystery of reflection, the owner of dance, and the spirit of beauty. She is the erotic mystery, because it is desire that moves us onward. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un is the force that turns iron into jewellery and necessity into elegance, because she is the spirit of elegance and seductive gentleness. <span class="small">&#210;</span>sun is represented by such animals as the quail, the peacock and the crocodile, and such metals as brass, bronze and gold.</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#210;</span>sogbo traditions, which are the origin of her cult, impart that she was a direct manifestation of Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span>, and in relation to this we have countless myths telling of how she conquered every single male power that refused to acknowledge her. Emphasis is still placed on her attributes as the spirit who ensures successful trade, who brings money and wealth and who touches everything with beauty. She is <i>omi tutu</i>, sweet and cold waters. Crocodiles and alligators living in swampy freshwater represent her aspect when her cold waters are heated up.</p>
<p class="indent">One story, from <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n state, tells how <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un was the child of Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja; it is an allegory of a deeper mystery, telling how the salty waters of mysterious inspiration gave birth to sweetness and cosmic grace. This story is important for understanding the vital role that <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un holds in Yorub<span class="small">&#225;</span> cosmology. It tells of how Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja experienced di<span class="small">&#64259;</span>culties giving birth to a child because of constant miscarriages. She managed to become pregnant through the wise counsel of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>, whose most important advice was to only take baths in cold water and to avoid any form of herb or medicine. The pregnancy was a delicate process, but the child was born, fragile and beautiful. She experienced severe bleeding from the umbilical cord, and Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja became distressed at the possibility of losing yet another child. She immediately called for <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>, who took her placenta, sixteen cowry shells, sixteen kola nuts, and sixteen bitter kola nuts, and made sacrifice to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>nil<span class="small">&#233;</span>, the owner of the earth. He called for <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n to help him deliver the sacrifice to the deepest part of the river, where the water was coldest, on the following day. The cowry shells were separated, eight were kept by <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> and the remaining eight by Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja. The sixteen shells were then given to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un, who rapidly grew in health and beauty.</p>
<p class="indent">There are several variations of this myth, but they all provide the same message. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> gained a special place in the life of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un and gave her the gift of reading the cowry shell oracle which led to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un being seen as the original wife (<i>apet<span class="small">&#7865;</span>bi</i>) of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>. With the gift of oracles and natural power to beautify and bring increase through the power of cold and calming waters, she was assigned <a id="page_41"></a>a unique place in the cosmology. <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n can be viewed as her godfather, as it was he who took the necessary steps in completing the sacrifice <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> began, to ensure that her life would be fortunate and blessed. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un came to Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span> hallowed with strength and wisdom to support her beauty and elegance, and from this female perfection was born. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un is the cold water that makes our consciousness calm and peaceful, but she is also the passion that lives in our heart, or rather, she is the river that connects the <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> with the heart.</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un can be said to represent the planet Venus in its totality. She has a deep relationship with the <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#x0276;</span></i>, or witches, but her witching ways are very different from the cataclysmic and chaotic energies usually associated with them. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un and <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#x0276;</span></i> do however meet in the concept of abundance (as related to passion). She, however, is a Venus thriving in beauty under the Sun, whereas the <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#x0276;</span></i> are Venusian powers who derive their power from the Moon.</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un is manifested in <i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#x0276;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i>, which is related to victory brought about by possessing wisdom and intuition, which is seen as a formula for abundance. <i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#x0276;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i> tells us that <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un learned the secrets of abundance from <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>, specifically, that she learned how to activate her potency for generating abundance and increase through his aid. The verse tells us that she achieved this by using her <i><span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> of <i>funk<span class="small">&#233;</span></i>, the power of attraction, which often has an erotic connotation. We need to understand that the erotic is about the sympathy between two forces which leads to the desire to merge. With <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un and <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>, we see a field of desire generated by <i>omi tutu</i>, or cold waters seeking a calm disposition and joyous consciousness, which gives birth to elegance and creativity. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un is the alchemical sulphur, the force that ignites. She ignites sexual passion and dramatic creativity, as much as she is the force that leads to increase and abundance.</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un is powerful, although her power is particularly related to the fragile elements of creation. Beauty and elegance are at times debased and obscured by rudeness and bad character. One story from <i>odiwori</i> tells of a time when the people of the earth became upset with their queen, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un, because of their greed and self-centeredness. They already had plenty, but wanted more, and <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s response was to leave her people and withhold the rain, the element which she commands. With their queen absent and drought causing hardship, they began to make sacrifices and placate her in order to persuade her to return, but <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un responded by stating that she would not return, but that they could use cold water and the plant known as <i><span class="small">&#x025A;</span>d<span class="small">&#250;</span>nd<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i> to solve their problems. They did as she <a id="page_42"></a>advised, and abundance returned with the rains, but <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un never came back to them.</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un is the principle that inspires artists and lovers, a force that wants our greatness to multiply for the benefit of ourselves and others. This same power can be reduced and limited, become objectified and wanton. When this happens <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un is no longer present, because she is the abundance of calm and soothing waters, as shown in the following <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span>k<span class="small">&#236;</span></i>:</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un siginsi</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Omi o s<span class="small">&#237;</span>r<span class="small">&#237;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Omi gbegbe lulu</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Omi a wowo m<span class="small">&#225;</span> d<span class="small">&#224;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un, omi a s<span class="small">&#224;</span>n rere wol<span class="small">&#233;</span> <span class="small">&#242;</span>d<span class="small">&#224;</span>l<span class="small">&#232;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Omi y<span class="small">&#224;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Omi y<span class="small">&#249;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>On<span class="small">&#237;</span>m<span class="small">&#224;</span>le od<span class="small">&#242;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ol<span class="small">&#225;</span>d<span class="small">&#233;</span>-kol<span class="small">&#249;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un gbinnIk<span class="small">&#250;</span>ngbinnIk<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Lo la il<span class="small">&#232;</span> d<span class="small">&#233;</span>l<span class="small">&#233;</span> al<span class="small">&#225;</span>foj<span class="small">&#250;</span>di</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>w<span class="small">&#242;</span> j<span class="small">&#224;</span>r<span class="small">&#224;</span>r<span class="small">&#224;</span> wok<span class="small">&#249;</span>n</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>O san rere wol<span class="small">&#233;</span> <span class="small">&#242;</span>d<span class="small">&#224;</span>l<span class="small">&#232;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Kare o!</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>A fi <span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#249;</span> gba <span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#192;</span>gb<span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#224;</span> ob<span class="small">&#236;</span>nrin</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>A b<span class="small">&#237;</span>mo m<span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#225;</span> bi ol<span class="small">&#233;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ore Y<span class="small">&#232;</span>y<span class="small">&#233;</span> o</i></p>
<p class="noindent1"><i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un from <span class="small">&#204;</span>j<span class="small">&#232;</span>s<span class="small">&#224;</span>, owner of the beaded comb</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>The waters do not flow backwards</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>The plentiful river teaches that it is always abundant</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Like the waters of the earth</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Waters that flow without overflowing</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un, the water that flows and invades the house of the traitors</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>May the waters go there</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>May the waters go everywhere</i></p>
<p class="noindent1"><a id="page_43"></a><i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un, spirit of the waters</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Abundance flows through your spirit</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un, with your great power</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Open the roads unto the house of the irreverent ones</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Water that runs all the way to the Ocean</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Currents of water that flow even to the house of</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>The traitor</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Reverence to you, glorious mother, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>You who receive offerings to the beating of the drum</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Woman who protects her own</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Children of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un are not lazy</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Oh, glorious mother <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un</i></p>
</div>
<p class="h3"><span class="testing">&#x025A;</span>s<span class="testing">&#225;</span>ny<span class="testing"><span class="testing">&#236;</span></span>n: the starry lord of woods and groves</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n is known as the doctor of the <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i>, a healer who possesses the knowledge of herbs, shrubs and trees. He is considered the brother of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>, and his own origin is equally mysterious. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> tells us that <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n fell from <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>run and sank into the ground in a city called Irawo. <i>Irawo</i> means <span class="small">&#8216;</span>star,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> and thus the deeper meaning of his fall is that he as a star became the first impulse of all life forms in the vegetable kingdom. As <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n was a star, so too is every plant a star growing out of the earth. His name is composed of <i>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>n</i>, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>increase of health,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> and <i>y<span class="small">&#236;</span>n</i>, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>to boil or manufacture something with the aid of fire.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> It is further related to <i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i>, in reference to one of his praise names, which describes him as <span class="small">&#8216;</span>He who sets fire to the birds<span class="small">&#8217;</span> which, as we shall see, carries significant mystical currents. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n is the root that brings forth plants and by virtue of this he is intimately related to the birds that rest in the crowns of the trees. These birds are associated with <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#x0276;</span></i>. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n uses the essence of birds, in particular their heads, in the same way as he uses herbs. He is represented by the <i>opa <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n</i>, which is a staff forged from iron, bearing a disk and a bird, or a collection of birds. The staff is usually planted in the ground and is turned into <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n through secret rituals. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n lives in the deepest parts of the forest, his isolation only broken by the <i><span class="small">&#237;</span>w<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i>, fairy-like spirits associated with the trees and clairvoyance, and two dog-headed helpers, <span class="small">&#192;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#224;</span> and <span class="small">&#192;</span>r<span class="small">&#242;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span>, who serve both <a id="page_44"></a>as messengers and as the abductors of children chosen to learn the secrets of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n. In some stories he is represented as a humble sage-like spirit, as befits a younger brother of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>; whilst, conversely, in others he is presented as the embodiment of selfishness and arrogance. He is said to have a great fondness for gin and tobacco and is at times used as an example of the misfortune arising from the abuse of intoxicants.</p>
<p class="indent">He is found in several <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span>s</i>, but <i><span class="small">&#210;</span>t<span class="small">&#250;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>p<span class="small">&#x025A;</span>n m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i> is particularly important in regard to him. The message in this <i>od<span class="small">&#250;</span></i> concerns illness, inoculation and healing. Abundance is often brought about through enduring hardship, because hard work is needed to foster appreciation. When we work hard to achieve something, the human tendency is to grasp onto the result and become selfish over our prize. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n did exactly this. One story speaks of how he obtained the knowledge of all herbs and medicines through years of hard work as a servant and gardener, and retired to the woods, isolating himself with his prize, and refusing to share it. Time passed, and the world had need of his wisdom, but he had no time for the world, so <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya, the spirit of the wind, came and shook the secrets of the leaves and medicines from his hands, scattering them all over the world. The wise spirit <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n was humbled through the intervention of <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya.</p>
<p class="indent">Another story relates how <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n was visited by <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> for the same purpose. Again he refused to share his wisdom, resulting in the loss of a leg, an arm, an eye and his voice. After this encounter with the Lord of Crossroads, his secrets were taken from him, and he could only speak through birds. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n is the archetypical master of wisdom and knowledge who falls prey to selfishness and misanthropy. In his case, his sacrifice would be <i>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>bo</i>, a change of attitude and <span class="small">&#8216;</span>active doing.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> He was tempered and forced by fate to examine his <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> and correct himself so that he could bring forth an <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#224;</span> rere</i>, a happy disposition, and be gifted with the spirit of sharing. Selfishness is an illness, and its remedy is generosity. We do not own our discoveries in the world; everything we discover belongs to us all as humans, divine beings venturing through our incarnations.</p>
<p class="indent">Other stories tell the exact opposite, and show <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n as a generous spirit who willingly divided the greenwood between spirits and humans in proportion to their need, and revealed the secret resonances between geographical locations and the mysteries of the woods.</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n is a concealed mystery, and his cult holds the secrets of enchantment and sorcery. To some extent there is a tension to be found between <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n and <a id="page_45"></a><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>, similar to that between a sorcerer and a sage. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n resorts to magical and sorcerous means in nature, whilst <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> uses <i><span class="small">&#7865;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i> and oracles to comprehend the situation and generate solutions. Essentially, we are speaking of two different forms of <i><span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> which both possess the capacity to change a bad fate into a good one. Herbs are of paramount importance in If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, hence the proverb: <span class="small">&#8216;</span>without herbs we could do nothing, without herbs we would not have <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>.<span class="small">&#8217;</span></p>
<p class="indent">People well versed in the lore of plants and their use are usually <i>on<span class="small">&#236;</span>seg<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i> or <i>olo<span class="small">&#242;</span>g<span class="small">&#249;</span>n</i>. These terms apply both to the practice itself and to the person with this particular knowledge. Also, <i>babal<span class="small">&#225;</span>wos</i> are generally very knowledgeable about the properties of herbs, as well as the various <i>ofo</i> (words of power or incantations), <i><span class="small">&#232;</span>p<span class="small">&#232;</span></i> (curses), and <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>p<span class="small">&#232;</span></i> (prayers). In regard to <i><span class="small">&#232;</span>p<span class="small">&#232;</span></i> and <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>p<span class="small">&#232;</span></i>, Buckley comments perceptively that both ways of charging a medicine are related to speaking truth (<i><span class="small">&#242;</span><span class="small">&#243;</span>t<span class="small">&#242;</span></i>), not in terms of stating facts, but in the sense that one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s words have a positive or negative impact on the world and on one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s environment (Buckley 1997:141). With herbs one can cure or cause illness. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n is the spiritual force at the root of this mystery and this reveals his ambivalence. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> herbs are separated into elements and genders, as well as nocturnal or diurnal, calmative (<i>ero</i>) or stimulant (<i>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i>). We have herbs of air (<i>ew<span class="small">&#233;</span> afeefe</i>), of fire (<i>ew<span class="small">&#233;</span> inon</i>), of water (<i>ew<span class="small">&#233;</span> om<span class="small">&#237;</span></i>) of earth and of wood (<i>ew<span class="small">&#233;</span> igb<span class="small">&#243;</span></i>). From these basic properties are generated medicines, healing baths (<i>omi ero</i>), spiritual essences and magical proscriptions, in secret ways with the aid of the power of the birds.</p>
<p class="indent">There is a story which tells of how <span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> bought <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n as a slave to help him on his farm. On his way to the farm, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n was drawn to the woods where he met an ugly looking dwarf by the name of <span class="small">&#192;</span>r<span class="small">&#242;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span>. <span class="small">&#192;</span>r<span class="small">&#242;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span> was a spirit of the woods who entrusted knowledge of herbs to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n and offered him his friendship (Prandi 2001:152). This <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>n</i> suggests that this spirit was imported into the cult of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>. Mason (1985: 94) says that: <span class="small">&#8216;</span><span class="small">&#7884;</span>y<span class="small">&#7885;</span> benefited from the trans-Saharan trade during the period of the Songhal ascendancy (in the 1500s), which at its height held both Nupe (T<span class="small">&#225;</span>p<span class="small">&#224;</span>) and Borgu (Ib<span class="small">&#224;</span>rib<span class="small">&#225;</span>) in its sway.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> This is interesting to note, since some of the <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span>k<span class="small">&#236;</span>s</i> to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n are pronounced in a secret language, which is similar to <i>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>p<span class="small">&#224;</span></i> dialect. This is also the case in Cuba, where they even refer to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n as <i>mandingo</i> or <i>mande</i> speaking. This suggests that <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#8217;</span>s role as a pact maker is important. <span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> goes to the dwelling of the witches to make a pact with them, and he buys <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n as a slave who ends up being his student. In Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span>land the consensus seem to be that <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n is from the city of <a id="page_46"></a><span class="small">&#204;</span>r<span class="small">&#224;</span>w<span class="small">&#242;</span> which is close to the border of present day Benin. The word <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>r<span class="small">&#224;</span>w<span class="small">&#242;</span></i>, as previously mentioned, means <span class="small">&#8216;</span>star,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> so it could additionally be that the story imparts the tradition that he fell from the stars to earth. This would harmonize with his epitaph of <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>r<span class="small">&#232;</span></i>, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>a stranger.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> Mason points out that <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n was not one of the sixteen companions of Od<span class="small">&#249;</span>duw<span class="small">&#224;</span> when they came to If<span class="small">&#232;</span>. His outlandishness is further represented by his habitation, the dense woods where he is accompanied by strange creatures, converses with plants and is in communion with the spirits of trees. His helpers are <span class="small">&#192;</span>r<span class="small">&#242;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span>, a disfigured gnome with the head and tail of a dog, and <span class="small">&#192;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#224;</span>, his female counterpart. These two beings are reputed to abduct children, taking them into the forest and challenging them. If they prove to be fearless, they are instructed in the lore of herbs and medicines and then sent back to their communities when their training is finished. Other <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i> close to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n are <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, the god of Iron, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#x0273;</span><span class="small">&#x025A;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#236;</span>, the god of the hunt, and Erinl<span class="small">&#232;</span>, a spirit who is considered to be <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#8217;</span>s physician and who is also connected to silent rivers and more mysterious forces of the woods. These three spirits use the woods by virtue of receiving tutoring from the owner of the woods, and since this is <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n, they must maintain a deep relationship and bond with him in order to use his kingdom. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n has strong ties with <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span>, to whom he gave support in his warfare, both by making magic, compounding cures and by healing.</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n is a very complex figure, both in origin and function. Mason says that he: <span class="small">&#8216;</span>embodies the idea of coming to grips with the evil side of existence <span class="small">&#8230;</span> He is the balanced mind flying up and soaring over all adversity. He possesses the mind and is ever on guard against man<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s inhumanity to man.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> (ibid. 98) The priests of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n are usually referred to as <i>Ol <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n</i>, literally meaning <span class="small">&#8216;</span>owner of the spirit of the forest.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n is one of the most important spirits of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, little can be done outside the realm of this spirit. The following salutation to him emphasises this, as well as his outlandish nature:</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#204;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span> O!</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#204;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span> Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>nmar<span class="small">&#232;</span> Oba at<span class="small">&#233;</span> rere k<span class="small">&#8217;</span>Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span>!</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ib<span class="small">&#225;</span> Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>j<span class="small">&#243;</span> <span class="small">&#242;</span>n<span class="small">&#237;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#204;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span> <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> L<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>lu Okiri <span class="small">&#242;</span>k<span class="small">&#242;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> <span class="small">&#236;</span>woni <span class="small">&#236;</span>lera <span class="small">&#224;</span>b<span class="small">&#242;</span> igbega, ire, oro bem l<span class="small">&#8217;</span><span class="small">&#243;</span>w<span class="small">&#243;</span> r<span class="small">&#233;</span>,</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>j<span class="small">&#242;</span>w<span class="small">&#243;</span> ki o wa f<span class="small">&#250;</span>n mi ni nkan wonyi!</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#204;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span> <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> Bara <span class="small">&#192;</span>gbonm<span class="small">&#236;</span>r<span class="small">&#232;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><a id="page_47"></a><i><span class="small">&#204;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span> <span class="small">&#204;</span>y<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>mi <span class="small">&#210;</span>s<span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#242;</span>ng<span class="small">&#225;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#204;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span> B<span class="small">&#224;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#204;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> On<span class="small">&#237;</span> ew<span class="small">&#233;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Agb<span class="small">&#233;</span>n<span class="small">&#237;</span>gi <span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#242;</span>m<span class="small">&#250;</span> adie ab<span class="small">&#236;</span>di s<span class="small">&#243;</span>ns<span class="small">&#243;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Esinsin ab<span class="small">&#232;</span>d<span class="small">&#242;</span> k<span class="small">&#237;</span>n<span class="small">&#237;</span>k<span class="small">&#237;</span>n<span class="small">&#237;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>K<span class="small">&#242;</span><span class="small">&#242;</span>go egb<span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#242;</span> ir<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ak<span class="small">&#233;</span>p<span class="small">&#232;</span> n<span class="small">&#237;</span>gb<span class="small">&#224;</span> <span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#242;</span> k<span class="small">&#242;</span> sunw<span class="small">&#242;</span>n</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>T<span class="small">&#237;</span>ot<span class="small">&#237;</span>o tin, <span class="small">&#243;</span> gb<span class="small">&#225;</span> aso <span class="small">&#242;</span>k<span class="small">&#249;</span>nr<span class="small">&#249;</span>n ta g<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#232;</span>g<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#232;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>El<span class="small">&#233;</span>s<span class="small">&#232;</span>kan ju el<span class="small">&#233;</span>s<span class="small">&#232;</span>M<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span> lo</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Aro abi-ok<span class="small">&#243;</span> li<span class="small">&#232;</span>li<span class="small">&#232;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ew<span class="small">&#233;</span> gbogbo k<span class="small">&#237;</span>k<span class="small">&#237;</span> <span class="small">&#242;</span><span class="small">&#242;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ew<span class="small">&#233;</span> <span class="small">&#242;</span>! Ew<span class="small">&#233;</span> <span class="small">&#242;</span>! Ew<span class="small">&#233;</span> <span class="small">&#242;</span>!</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#192;</span>gb<span class="small">&#233;</span>nigi <span class="small">&#232;</span>s<span class="small">&#236;</span>s<span class="small">&#236;</span> kos<span class="small">&#249;</span>n</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Agogo <span class="small">&#180;</span>nla se erpe agb<span class="small">&#225;</span>ra</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#211;</span>gb<span class="small">&#224;</span> w<span class="small">&#243;</span>n l<span class="small">&#224;</span> t<span class="small">&#225;</span>n, w<span class="small">&#243;</span>n d<span class="small">&#250;</span>p<span class="small">&#233;</span> t<span class="small">&#233;</span>nit<span class="small">&#233;</span>ni</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#192;</span>r<span class="small">&#242;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span> j<span class="small">&#225;</span> si k<span class="small">&#242;</span>t<span class="small">&#242;</span> <span class="small">&#243;</span><span class="small">&#242;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n m<span class="small">&#225;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>El<span class="small">&#233;</span>s<span class="small">&#232;</span> kan ti <span class="small">&#243;</span> l<span class="small">&#233;</span> el<span class="small">&#233;</span>s<span class="small">&#232;</span>M<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span> sare</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ew<span class="small">&#233;</span> gbogbo k<span class="small">&#236;</span>k<span class="small">&#236;</span> <span class="small">&#242;</span><span class="small">&#242;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ew<span class="small">&#233;</span> a j<span class="small">&#233;</span> <span class="small">&#242;</span><span class="small">&#242;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n a j<span class="small">&#233;</span> fun mi</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Loni emi f<span class="small">&#233;</span> ire r<span class="small">&#233;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n j<span class="small">&#242;</span>w<span class="small">&#243;</span> f<span class="small">&#250;</span>n mi nire</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>F<span class="small">&#250;</span>n mi ni ol<span class="small">&#225;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Wa wo mi san</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ki o s<span class="small">&#237;</span> f<span class="small">&#250;</span>n mi ni <span class="small">&#224;</span>b<span class="small">&#242;</span>, oro <span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#237;</span> <span class="small">&#224;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#225;</span>f<span class="small">&#237;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>A dupe Alagbo</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#192;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span> ti Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#250;</span>nmar<span class="small">&#232;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>nmar<span class="small">&#233;</span> <span class="small">&#192;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent1"><i>Salutations!</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Salutations to Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>nmar<span class="small">&#232;</span>, the King who spreads out over the entire universe!</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Salutations to the owner of the day!</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Salutations to <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>, owner of the city and its gates!</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>, you who are the owner of health, protection, advancement,</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>good will and prosperity, I ask respectfully that you give me all of these!</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I give salutations to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>, coconut of great wisdom</i></p>
<p class="noindent1"><a id="page_48"></a><i>I salute the Mother of the Birds of Night</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Salutations to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n, my Father</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Salutations to the custodian of leaves</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>He who lives amongst the trees,</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>The crawling one who dresses in spikes and thorns</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>The fly that has a very small liver</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>He who is as strong as a tree made of iron</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>He who we call upon when things are not going well</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Slender one whom when he dons the cloak of illness moves as if he were falling</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>He who has one leg, but yet is more powerful than those who have two</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Weak one who owns a weak penis</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>All leaves that possess humidity can be used for medicine</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Oh leaves! Oh leaves! Oh leaves!</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#192;</span>gb<span class="small">&#233;</span>nigi, divine one who dresses in straw</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Great bell of iron who powerfully resounds</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>He to whom everyone gives unconditional thanks after he has humiliated</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>all diseases</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#192;</span>r<span class="small">&#242;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span> who jumps into the well with amulets tied around his chest</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Man with one leg that causes those with two legs to run</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>For you every leaf is medicine</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>The leaves will work well for me</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Today I am seeking your good will</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Give me the honour</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>And heal me</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Give to me your protection, give me prosperity and peace</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I pay tribute to the owner of medicine</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>So let it be Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>nmar<span class="small">&#232;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>nmar<span class="small">&#232;</span> let it be so</i></p>
</div>
<p class="h3"><span class="testing">&#7885;</span>bal<span class="testing">&#250;</span>way<span class="testing">&#x00cb;</span>: king of the world, owner of pestilence</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#7884;</span>bal<span class="small">&#250;</span>way<span class="small">&#233;</span> is honoured as the owner of the world, he is the force responsible for the beginnings of decay and our return home to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>run as our body inevitably returns to his element, earth. He was one of the spiritual forces that came to Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span> <a id="page_49"></a>with the task of creating stability, hence he is referred to as <i><span class="small">&#232;</span>bora</i>, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>a force of stability.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> In order to effectuate this task he brought sickness and disease. Obal<span class="small">&#250;</span>ay<span class="small">&#233;</span> is the fleshy earth that covers the bones of Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, which were erected as a compass crossroads at the core of the earth. He is the king of the world. When we come to earth it is because he permits our arrival, and it is because of him we merge with the earth when we depart. <span class="small">&#7884;</span>bal<span class="small">&#250;</span>way<span class="small">&#233;</span> is the life cycle itself. He is the fever that announces illness, hence he is praised as <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the scorching heat at midday<span class="small">&#8217;</span> and the <span class="small">&#8216;</span>boiling waters of earth<span class="small">&#8217;</span> and is associated with every disease borne by hot winds or stinging insects, especially the mosquitoes and ants that are his messengers. He is represented by palm trees draped in palm fronds, <i>m<span class="small">&#224;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span>w<span class="small">&#242;</span></i>, in honour of his great age. He is a very red and hot force who rules the bloodstream in particular, whereas <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un is the owner of any fluid that flows in the body. We can understand him to be the guardian of Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span>. Whenever the inhabitants of the earth become too abusive, or their character degenerates, catastrophes and epidemics often arise as a consequence. <span class="small">&#7884;</span>bal<span class="small">&#250;</span>way<span class="small">&#233;</span> is the spiritual force that controls and ensures the stability of the earth herself and is as such, seen by some as the power of retribution encoded in the earth and manifesting when she is <span class="small">&#8216;</span>heated<span class="small">&#8217;</span> by abuse. Edwards and Mason summarise <span class="small">&#7884;</span>bal<span class="small">&#250;</span>way<span class="small">&#233;</span> in the following way:</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent">He was a bohemian who ran the gauntlet of experience, was a<span class="small">&#64260;</span>icted, but found glory in the end. In his youth he was a dancer who was fond of drumming and music. He was said to be a womaniser, who over-indulged in the vices of men. He lives in the deep, cool forest with <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n and he has a close relationship with his brother <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span>, <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> and <span class="small">&#210;</span>ris<span class="small">&#224;</span> Oko. (1985: 72)</p>
</div>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> Oko serves as a contrast to <span class="small">&#7884;</span>bal<span class="small">&#250;</span>way<span class="small">&#233;</span>. Each has a strong relationship with illness and the o<span class="small">&#64259;</span>ce of judge, and both exemplify the virtues of the latter. They are related to winds, but whilst <span class="small">&#7884;</span>bal<span class="small">&#250;</span>way<span class="small">&#233;</span> is the hot and scorching midday wind, <span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> Oko is the wind of night; and no one knows what that brings. They both have a connection with stinging insects, but <span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> Oko is the owner of bees, whereas mosquitoes are favoured by <span class="small">&#7884;</span>bal<span class="small">&#250;</span>way<span class="small">&#233;</span>.</p>
<p class="indent">To <span class="small">&#7884;</span>bal<span class="small">&#250;</span>way<span class="small">&#233;</span> belong all kinds of grains and seeds, and above all sesame seeds which are considered to have a relationship with smallpox. Peanuts too are sacred to him.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_50"></a>His colours are red and violet, which mimic the fever and strangulation caused by the illnesses that control the balance of the population of the earth.</p>
<p class="indent">His shrines are commonly found outside the compounds, near to the forest, and his rituals are serene and filled with awe. In general he is not spoken about often, in order to not agitate him, although he is praised as a great physician, because he knows the secrets of diseases and their remedies. It is advisable not to use his true name, S<span class="small">&#242;</span>ponn<span class="small">&#224;</span>, which might serve as an enchantment to bring about his presence, hence he is commonly praised as <span class="small">&#7884;</span>bal<span class="small">&#250;</span>way<span class="small">&#233;</span>, the king of Earth.</p>
<p class="indent">His healing powers are often said to be available through working with Nana Buluk<span class="small">&#251;</span>, who is regarded as his mother. She lives alone in the woods, where she oversees all the freshwater springs in the world. She is represented by the African bowstring hemp (<i>Sansevieria</i>) and bamboo shots which symbolise an ancestral connection through spirit, the earth mound mimicking a termite hill. She shares this with <span class="small">&#7884;</span>bal<span class="small">&#250;</span>way<span class="small">&#233;</span>, and they both have a preference for being covered in palm fronds. Bamboo is the plant that manifested her on the earth. This is quite proper, as it keeps the earth stable, preventing erosion and is benevolent to the wider ecology. Bamboo is a tree which manifests in <i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#x0276;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i>, and is associated with <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un and <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un is seen as the water that fills the bamboo, whilst <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya is the wind that moves its leaves, indicating their presence; which is felt as a sense of fragility, abundance and strength.</p>
<p class="indent">Some traditions tell that Nana Buluk<span class="small">&#251;</span> is the celestial wife of <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>, Yem<span class="small">&#242;</span>w<span class="small">&#243;</span>, who manifests in the 28 stations of the moon, and is the owner of its light. It was <span class="small">&#7884;</span>bal<span class="small">&#250;</span>way<span class="small">&#233;</span> who first escorted her to the earth. She is said to walk with the spirits of fire, and in several of her songs she is hailed as both a poisoner and a perfect midwife.</p>
<p class="indent">We find here, in the powers of <span class="small">&#7884;</span>bal<span class="small">&#250;</span>way<span class="small">&#233;</span>, the presence of fire and heat in need of being tempered by the cold water of Nana Buluk<span class="small">&#251;</span>. Just as we find pestilence being balanced by healing, and the starry spaces beyond the moon being mirrored by the earth. This represents the totality of a cycle that plays itself out in calm and agitation, by day as much as by night. <span class="small">&#7884;</span>bal<span class="small">&#250;</span>way<span class="small">&#233;</span> contains all of this, which is why one <i>adura</i> (prayer) says the following:</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent"><a id="page_51"></a><i>Adura <span class="small">&#x00f4;</span>bal<span class="small">&#250;</span>way<span class="small">&#233;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent1"><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> jingbinni</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> tii mu omo ati iya</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Bi o ba um nwon tan</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>O tun le pada wa um baba</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> bi aje</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>O mo il<span class="small">&#233;</span> Oso, O mo il<span class="small">&#233;</span> <span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#x0276;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>O gba oso loju</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Oso ku finrinfinrin</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>O so aje lerukale</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> jingbinni</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>A momo ohun</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>O pomoolomo ku finrinfinrin</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>O foju omoolomo gbedoro</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Jowo ma se mi</i></p>
<p class="noindent1"><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> of the blistering wounds</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> who can bring sickness to the child and to the mother</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>When he brings us sickness</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>He might return and bring sickness to the father as well</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> who is like a sorcerer</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Who knows the house of the sorcerer, who knows the house of the witches</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>He beat the face of the sorcerer</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>The sorcerer died without moving</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>The power of evil was taken away from the sorceress</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> of the blistering wounds</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Takes away things with measured conscience</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Killed the child of the other without moving</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Used the face of the child of the other to nail down the pain</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Please, do not harm us</i></p>
</div>
<p class="h3"><a id="page_52"></a>OL<span class="testing">&#x00d3;</span>KUN AND Y<span class="testing">&#x011d;</span>M<span class="testing">&#x00f4;</span>JA: THE RADICAL WISDOM FROM THE SALTY WATERS</p>
<p class="indent">Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja is a spiritual force known in the New World as the spirit of the ocean and is the patron <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> of Brazil and Cuba. She is associated with mermaids, sailors and fishermen and is considered to be the mother of the bloodstreams of the earth, namely the great salty waters that can be seen as preserving the mysteries of gestation in the womb. All marine life is sacred to her, as are birds that live at the ocean shore and thrive in water.</p>
<p class="indent">Legend says that she was born in the land of Takua where the mighty <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n river begins and that she wed <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n after her marriage to Okef<span class="small">&#232;</span> (better known as <span class="small">&#210;</span><span class="small">&#242;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>oko, an alternative name for <span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> Oko) ended. Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja is the patron of the secret society known as G<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>l<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>d<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>, which is said to have originated in the land of Ketu, but which is attested to in both Benin and Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span>land.</p>
<p class="indent">The G<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>l<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>d<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span> society originated when a daughter of the Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja, following several miscarriages, found ways of placating the spirit of the river with wooden dolls and spectacles. These enabled the mothers, the owners of the powers of <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#x0276;</span></i>, to be appeased, and released benevolent rays of the powers of <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>r<span class="small">&#243;</span>k<span class="small">&#242;</span></i> and Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n to support Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s <i><span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> bringing blessings to pregnancies and opening the roads to wealth. Drewal <span class="small">&#38;</span> Drewal say of G<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>l<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>d<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>:</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent">The etymology of the word G<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>l<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>d<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span> reveals its central concern and its ultimate significance. <i>G<span class="small">&#232;</span></i> means <span class="small">&#8216;</span>to soothe, to placate, to pet or coddle<span class="small">&#8217;</span>; <i><span class="small">&#232;</span>l<span class="small">&#232;</span></i> refers to a woman<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s private parts, those that symbolize women<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s secrets and their life-giving powers; and <i>d<span class="small">&#233;</span></i> connotes <span class="small">&#8216;</span>to soften with care or gentleness.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> Together these ideas convey the significance of G<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>l<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>d<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>, performances carefully conceived and executed to pay homage to women so that the community may partake of their innate power for its benefit. (1983: xv)</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">A story in <i><span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>nd<span class="small">&#225;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i> tells of how a manifestation of Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja with the name Mojelewo, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>she who owns the long breasts, she who owns the forest,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> married Oker<span class="small">&#233;</span>, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>he with the bloodshot eyes,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> in preference to <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n. He desperately wanted to marry her. She was truly looking for a good man and granted his proposal on the condition that he would never see her long breasts. He agreed, and they lived together happily and had several children, until one day Oker<span class="small">&#233;</span> came home early with a smile, as his wife had washed all their clothes and was without <a id="page_53"></a>anything to cover her breasts. Mojelewo became enraged and ran away from him. When she fled, she fell into the <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n river and was transformed into Ofiki, which is the name of this part of the delta, because she was flowing towards the ocean to be owned by no one, and everyone.</p>
<p class="indent"><i><span class="small">&#204;</span>r<span class="small">&#7865;</span>t<span class="small">&#x0275;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i> tells of the consequences of this plunge into the river. She sank to its deepest depths, and indeed, if you see the <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n river it looks like a vast dark ocean that you cannot see the other side of. It was here that Mojelewo fell and realized the mysteries of <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#x0276;</span></i>. When she came to Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun, the owner of the oceans, he told her that he had never seen such magnificent powers. She had managed to balance the red powers of witchcraft with the white powers of the <i>ir<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#242;</span>le</i>. It was her accomplishment <span class="small">&#8216;</span>to wash white rusty iron with the blood of sheep and snakes.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun recognized her arrival as the fulfillment of his destiny. His <i>awo</i> had told him that he would encounter a spouse who would make his life sweeter than honey.</p>
<p class="indent">Like Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja, Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun is a complex spiritual force, the owner of all salty waters and wealth, as it says in this song for him, collected by John Mason (1996):</p>
<table cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" class="table">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span><span class="small">&#242;</span>k<span class="small">&#251;</span>n lok<span class="small">&#250;</span>n gb<span class="small">&#233;</span>ra nil<span class="small">&#232;</span> o</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Strong owner of stone beads rise out of the earth</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Os<span class="small">&#236;</span>n er<span class="small">&#249;</span>p<span class="small">&#232;</span> gb<span class="small">&#233;</span>ra l<span class="small">&#232;</span></i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Chief of the soil rise out of the earth</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Omo omi Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span><span class="small">&#242;</span>k<span class="small">&#251;</span>n da ow<span class="small">&#243;</span></i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Children of water, Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun creates money</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Y<span class="small">&#232;</span>y<span class="small">&#233;</span> i d<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>na Omo</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Mother</i>(<i>Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun</i>) <i>gives children as presents</i></p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="indent">The concept of Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun is one of boundless mystery, for he came to earth manifesting enigma itself as revealed in foresight and prophetic predictions. He is a <i>funfun</i> force, meaning one of the original spiritual forces that came to Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span>. He was assigned the mission of overseeing and protecting everything below the consciousness of all living things. We find several stories in which Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun challenges Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span> and <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> in terms of supremacy and wisdom because his domain is the greater part of Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span> after all, and his wisdom penetrates such depths that only he knows its mysteries and secrets. Because of this, Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun is at times depicted as male and other times as female; he is, however, a male force and his bipolar expression is simply an expression of his mystery.</p>
<p class="indent">Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja is the archetypical witch, a force associated with the moon, with silver, lead, tin and with all that is white and transparent. This is mediated with green and blue (colours which are seen as shades of black in a Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> context), <a id="page_54"></a>and associated with her original essence, which in turn relates to the greenwood and space, whether liquid or aerial. Thus her shrines are located either at the entrance of the woods or on the ocean shore.</p>
<p class="indent">Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja connects with <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n in her love for pine, and with the ocean in her love for corals and pearls. She is the crown of <span class="small">&#210;</span>s<span class="small">&#249;</span>m<span class="small">&#224;</span>r<span class="small">&#232;</span> when the rainbow appears, as the rain is another of her manifestations. Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja is the <span class="small">&#8216;</span>mother of sea creatures<span class="small">&#8217;</span> and is as such the mother of us all, in remembrance of the time when we made the transition from waters to dry land.</p>
<p class="indent">Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja guards the cypress and mangroves that seal this mystery as the ocean merges with the forest. She is the movement of the waves meeting land. She is a paradox which we constantly witness.</p>
<p class="indent">The ocean represents memory and beginnings and it is in this way that Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja became the queen of the oceans. She is associated with the womb that is always fertile, because her own womb resembles the ocean. She is both the continuation of what exists and the <i><span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> of new, alien and changing forms, being the spirit that oversees cultural adaption. Her prominence in the New World testifies to this, demonstrating her ability to span water and land; just as man is a composite of water and earth. Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja is truly the mother of all <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>. She is depicted in the Diaspora as a siren dressed in white, rising from the oceans with seven stars and a crescent moon adorning her head. These associations run deep, to the mysterious realms of Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun.</p>
<p class="indent">Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun is the owner of the ocean, and of waters in general. He is the mystery of riches as much as he demonstrates that richness is a mystery. Because of his wealth, he grew arrogant and full of hubris. Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun is a demonstration of grandeur that reminds us that wealth and abundance without wisdom will only drag us into mysterious depths.</p>
<p class="indent">Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja and Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun are powers tied to offspring and are considered to be extremely aggressive patrons of their children. Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun, as owner of the ocean, owns all the creatures within it. Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja, being the ocean mirror itself, manifests as a shark, hurricane, maelstrom or siren, a dolphin, whale or a toad or frog. Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja uses everything in Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s kingdom in conformity with her powers, her works aiming towards multiplication, growth, abundance and protection. Both she and Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun are fierce protectors and warriors on behalf of their children, who are not only marine life, but everyone possessed of a deep consciousness. As one prayer in reverence of Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja says:</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent"><a id="page_55"></a><i><span class="small">&#204;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span> <span class="small">&#204;</span>y<span class="small">&#225;</span> Y<span class="small">&#7865;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja mo juba o!</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Y<span class="small">&#7865;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja ooo!</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Wa gbo <span class="small">&#7865;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span> mi</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#204;</span>wo ti nf<span class="small">&#250;</span>n eniti nwa omo ni omo</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>J<span class="small">&#242;</span>w<span class="small">&#243;</span> mo pe o, f<span class="small">&#250;</span>n mi ni omo</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>So mi di oloro</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Yemoja, y<span class="small">&#233;</span>y<span class="small">&#233;</span> <span class="small">&#224;</span>won eja, fi abo re bo mi</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ki ik<span class="small">&#250;</span> <span class="small">&#224;</span>ti <span class="small">&#224;</span>r<span class="small">&#249;</span>n m<span class="small">&#225;</span> wo<span class="small">&#8217;</span>l<span class="small">&#233;</span> to mi wa</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#204;</span>y<span class="small">&#225;</span> mi j<span class="small">&#242;</span>w<span class="small">&#243;</span> so ekun mi dayo</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#192;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span> to Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#192;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span> Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent1"><i>Salutations to Y<span class="small">&#7865;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Oh Y<span class="small">&#7865;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Listen to my lament</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>You who give children to whoever wants children</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Please, give me children</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Make me prosperous</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Y<span class="small">&#7865;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja, mother of fish, I crave your protection</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>So that death and disease don<span class="small">&#8217;</span>t enter my house</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>My mother, please, turn my tears and suffering into joy!</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>So let it be Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span> let it be so</i></p>
</div>
<p class="h3">eg<span class="testing">&#250;</span>ng<span class="testing">&#250;</span>n: the bones we are</p>
<p class="indent">Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n is the collective memory of ancestry. It is often confused with <i>eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i>, the notion of a specific ancestor. When we speak of more than one ancestor we can say that we are talking about Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, because this force is the sum of ancestral knowledge. Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n are <i>ar<span class="small">&#225;</span> <span class="small">&#x025A;</span>run</i>, dwellers on the other side, whose task is to ensure the straight alignment of the crossroads of the worlds. It is a stabilizing force that can also manifest in earthquakes and eruptions as a sign that the stability they uphold is in disorder. We can appeal to these forces for understanding and appeasement, because we are the living continuation of ancestry.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_56"></a>Eg<span class="small">&#249;</span>ng<span class="small">&#249;</span>n is the link between Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span> and <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>run and reminds us of our dual nature as divine beings on a human journey. Ancestral memory is the red thread that makes this journey understandable. Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n makes straight our connection to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>run as we walk the earth. Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n is related to <i>ik<span class="small">&#250;</span></i> (death), because death is a divine blessing: it reminds us that life is temporary and that we are on our way back to the eternal. We shed tears of loss because we feel the separation. The experience of losing someone is the same as to yearn for the eternal. <i>Ik<span class="small">&#250;</span></i> teaches us that the world is a marketplace, an adventure and a journey through joy and experience in which we eat both bitter leaves and honey. They serve as a reminder of the cosmic design until he finally takes us home.</p>
<p class="indent">Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n teaches that we are all unique and that no one destiny is identical to another. This should make us savour life on earth, celebrating our similarities and differences. However, experience shows that this is not always the case! This truth is evident in the songs, prayers, and reverential declarations offered to Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, which are linked to the deeds and misdeeds of a given family and its memory as a family acting in a community and in the wider world. Work with Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n is always oriented towards an understanding of who you are within the greater web of events. Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n is the structure of your memory. It is the three nails within your soul that spark into self knowledge.</p>
<p class="indent">Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n celebrations in Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span>land take the form of a masquerade. The <i>eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i> priests dress up in multicolored costumes, carefully covering every inch of skin, and commonly wearing a carved wooden headdress, often alien and grotesque in form. The masquerade is a play between the costumed priests and the celebrants, in which the <i>eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i> chase people around and try to beat them with their atori sticks. It is crucial not to get beaten by the <i>eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i> because this will bring the attention of death upon you, at the very least some di<span class="small">&#64259;</span>culties will arise from being touched by a random <i>eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i>. It reminds the participants that death is always present, and can strike the one who deserves it as well as a righteous person who is simply in the wrong place. It makes us aware of this on a personal level as much as it calls our attention to the complexity of community. In the <i>eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i> masquerade, ancestry touches ancestry. When this happens we encounter sympathy as much as antipathy, which can bring generations of antipathy into sympathy as well as provoking the opposite. The <i>eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i> masquerade mimics the dance of life in a graceful mockery of our existence on earth, because the alien headdresses that speak of everything nocturnal and <a id="page_57"></a>foreign that is not of this world serve to remind us of where we came from: the realm of mystery.</p>
<p class="indent">Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n represents the mystery we constantly exist within, the meeting of friends, foes, and challengers and the way in which this always culminates in a dance of understanding that makes these relationships straight and understandable. With the left foot we give resistance and with the right acceptance, and in this way we dance through the world, taking three steps back or two ahead. It is through the dance of ancestry that we can understand where we are coming from and thus gain wisdom about <span class="small">&#8216;</span>who we are,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> as in the following prayer taken from Awo Fa<span class="small">&#39;</span>lokun<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s <i>Family Spirit</i> (2006):</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent"><i>Or<span class="small">&#237;</span>k<span class="small">&#236;</span> Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i></p>
<p class="noindent1"><i>Il<span class="small">&#232;</span> mo p<span class="small">&#232;</span> <span class="small">&#243;</span> o. Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, mo p<span class="small">&#232;</span> o o.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, mo p<span class="small">&#232;</span> o o. Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, mo p<span class="small">&#232;</span> o.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Eti were ni ti <span class="small">&#232;</span>ku<span class="small">&#250;</span>t<span class="small">&#233;</span> il<span class="small">&#233;</span> o. As<span class="small">&#249;</span>nm<span class="small">&#225;</span>parad<span class="small">&#224;</span> ni tigi <span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#224;</span> o.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#192;</span>g<span class="small">&#243;</span> k<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#237;</span> gb<span class="small">&#243;</span> ekun omo re k<span class="small">&#242;</span> m<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> tati were.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i><span class="small">&#192;</span>wa omo re ni a p<span class="small">&#233;</span> o; a w<span class="small">&#225;</span> l<span class="small">&#225;</span>ti se o<span class="small">&#250;</span>n re.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>M<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> j<span class="small">&#233;</span> k<span class="small">&#237;</span> a pa od<span class="small">&#250;</span>n je; m<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> j<span class="small">&#233;</span> k<span class="small">&#237;</span> od<span class="small">&#250;</span>n <span class="small">&#243;</span> pa <span class="small">&#224;</span>wa n<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> je.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#250;</span>n k<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#237;</span> pa od<span class="small">&#250;</span>n esin run. Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n k<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#237;</span> pa od<span class="small">&#250;</span>n esin run.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>M<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> j<span class="small">&#233;</span> k<span class="small">&#237;</span> a r<span class="small">&#237;</span> ik<span class="small">&#250;</span> omom m<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> j<span class="small">&#233;</span> ki a r<span class="small">&#237;</span> ik<span class="small">&#250;</span> obinrin.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>M<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> j<span class="small">&#233;</span> k<span class="small">&#237;</span> a r<span class="small">&#237;</span> <span class="small">&#236;</span>j<span class="small">&#224;</span> <span class="small">&#236;</span>gb<span class="small">&#243;</span>n<span class="small">&#225;</span>. Lil<span class="small">&#233;</span> ni k<span class="small">&#237;</span> a m<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> l<span class="small">&#233;</span> si, m<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> j<span class="small">&#233;</span> k<span class="small">&#237;</span> a p<span class="small">&#232;</span>d<span class="small">&#237;</span>n. Ase.</i></p>
<p class="noindent1"><i>Earth I call on you. Ancestor, I call on you.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Ancestor, I call on you. Ancestor, I call on you.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>House rats are very alert. Rafters never change their position.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Rat does not disregard the cry of its young ones.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>We, your children, gather here for your annual ceremony.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Do not let us die during the year.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Those who give the annual offerings do not willingly abolish the practice.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>The society of mediums does not abolish its annual practice.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Prevent the death of children and wives.</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Save us from disease. Let us multiply and increase. May it be so.</i></p>
</div>
<p class="h3"><a id="page_58"></a><span class="testing">&#x00cb;</span><span class="testing">&#7779;</span><span class="testing">&#249;</span>: sweet magma that moves the crossroads of the world</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> holds a unique position in the cosmology of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>. He is the divine messenger and the force that answers our prayers and makes our sacrifices effective. <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> is said to be a trickster, but this requires some qualification; he is merely the power of choice represented by the crossroads. He is the choice at each corner of the crossroads that initiates the decision that takes place at its centre. <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> was translated as <span class="small">&#8216;</span>devil<span class="small">&#8217;</span> in the first English-Yorub<span class="small">&#225;</span> dictionary, which is interesting, as the devil in European witchcraft traditions is associated with chance, luck and choice, a power close to God, but with an appetite for and interest in human affairs. There is resonance between the two figures, but the devil as the author of evil is a meaningless attribute to apply to <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>.</p>
<p class="indent">He is said to be the youngest of the spiritual forces that came to earth in the sense that he arrived last. When he got here all the other <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i> had taken their powers and <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> accepted what was left over as that which he was meant to have: the <i><span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> of the vital force of Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span>, which he became the custodian of. In other words, <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> was gifted with being the active extension of the godhead. He was given a magical staff that enabled him to traverse space and time at great speed, like Hermes. As the custodian of the vital force, he was given the o<span class="small">&#64259;</span>ce of the taskmaster of the <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i>, as well as being their messenger. <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> is represented by his magical staff, medicine gourds and clubs. He is the erect phallus symbolizing the fiery lava at the centre of the earth. This gives birth to the volcanic laterite rocks which are the prime manifestation of <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>, as are any black rocks that give the appearance of growing out of the earth.</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> might have been the last to arrive to earth, but he was originally the leader of the spiritual forces and was the power that brought light out of darkness. In this regard, a tale relates how he regained his original <i><span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> and was recognized as the governor of Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span><span class="small">&#8217;</span>s powers, and thus became the acknowledged leader of all <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i>. <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> challenged <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>, calling him a liar and saying that it was impossible that he, who was the youngest of them all, could be the leader of the <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i>. <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> summoned all the other <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i> to the house of Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span>, where Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span> said that they should accept <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> as their leader, but they refused to accept him unless he demonstrated that he could be victorious over them in battle. <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> accepted the challenge, and took the <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i> to the crossroads where heaven and earth met and asked whoever wanted to fight him to step up. The <a id="page_59"></a>first to challenge him was <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, but <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> cunningly managed to throw him to the ground. <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n went to earth in shame and defeat, where he established a cult in his honour. <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> stepped up next, but <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> outsmarted him too, and threw him to the ground. <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> left for earth in resentment, and established his cult. Then <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya stepped up, but he defeated her, just as he had <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n and <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span>. The same went for the other <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i> who came forward. When he had defeated all the challengers, he went back to Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span> and said, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>I have proven myself, I have proved that I am the leader of <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i>.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span> invested him with the <i><span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> of authority and respect, and additionally gave him the <i><span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> that would destroy the <i><span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> of any <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> who didn<span class="small">&#8217;</span>t give him his respect.</p>
<p class="indent">The name <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> is subject to several interpretations, but one of the most widely repeated is <span class="small">&#8216;</span>he who gathers everything together,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> and it is in this capacity that he is known as <span class="small">&#8216;</span>he who challenges man, again and again.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> is the fierce one who pulls and pushes us to pursue our destiny, and he is the whip across our back that drives us forward on the path of fate when we make choices contrary to our wellbeing. He is the force we unleash by our lack of good judgment and wise choices. He has many praise names and is known as <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the one who owns many names,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the owner of the road,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the one who parts the road,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> and a multitude of others. These reflect his enormous dynamic, which ranges from his feminine and benevolent aspect to the club bearing man with an erect phallus who hands out whips to a fighting crowd just to teach them painful lessons.</p>
<p class="indent">If<span class="small">&#225;</span> teaches us that the principle and idea of light is what makes the manifest world possible. The shades of light with their frequencies are encoded in the first sixteen <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> pairs, or <i>m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span>s</i>, but If<span class="small">&#225;</span> tells us that a seventeenth principle comes into play in releasing their potencies. We can call this the +1 to the 16 <i>m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span>s</i>. This is represented by a combination <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> known as <i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#x0276;</span>t<span class="small">&#250;</span>r<span class="small">&#225;</span></i>, which brings <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> into manifestation, while he is gestated in <i><span class="small">&#210;</span>f<span class="small">&#250;</span>nw<span class="small">&#243;</span>nr<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i>, another combination <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i>. In this discussion of mixture and fusion, we begin to realize the complexity of <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>. The <i>odu <span class="small">&#210;</span>f<span class="small">&#250;</span>nw<span class="small">&#243;</span>nr<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i> details the consequences of this mystery, in which <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> transforms the source of light and generates possibilities. When <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> mediates the powers of <i><span class="small">&#210;</span>f<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i> he causes diversity to occur. This diversity takes shape in opinions, people and situations. A plethora of opportunities and choice open before us. This is considered a good thing, though it may appear bitter or bad to us. The bitterness of light is our perception of its manifestation, not necessary a cosmic truth.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_60"></a><i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>w<span class="small">&#x0273;</span>nr<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i> is the power of radical change and transformation, a force that turns night into day and manifests the inexplicable. <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> is a concentration of different powers, but it is within this energetic family that he claims the power of transformation. <i><span class="small">&#210;</span>f<span class="small">&#250;</span>nw<span class="small">&#243;</span>nr<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i> holds the secret of how to enable ourselves to walk the world gracefully and with dignity. This is caused by both accepting the state of the world and taking steps towards positive change. It is about how we approach the marvellous diversity of manifestation, whether with resistance or with interest. At every corner, threshold, door and crossroads we encounter <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> as the custodian of the vital force that creates movement, change and choice in the world. The combination of these forces, <i><span class="small">&#210;</span>f<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i> and <i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>w<span class="small">&#x0273;</span>nr<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i>, indicates that the powers that gestated <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> were concerned with how the source of light would generate radical change, while the od<span class="small">&#249;</span> that manifested him on earth, <i><span class="small">&#210;</span>s<span class="small">&#233;</span>t<span class="small">&#250;</span>r<span class="small">&#225;</span></i>, speaks of maintaining a clear vision in the fragile web of the world.</p>
<p class="indent">One story in <i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#x0276;</span>t<span class="small">&#250;</span>r<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> tells of how <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> was originally a female foetus, as we all are when we take shape in the womb, but that the spiritual forces found it necessary that he should be born a male. He was born to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un, who was the 17th <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#7885;</span>l<span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> to come to earth, and the only female force amongst them. We shall look at the mysteries of <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> more closely throughout this text, and in particular in the very last chapter, but for now it is important to emphasise his enigmatic nature. It is also necessary to look more closely at his relationship with <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> in order to fully understand his essence, so for now he will be summarized in the form given by the following prayer:</p>
<p class="indent1"><i>Adura <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>&ugrave;</i></p>
<table cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" class="table">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Laalu, <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> o!</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Owner of the city and its gates, <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span></i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> Odara</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>, renowned one</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Omokunrin idolofin</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>The one who does as he sees fit</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Ebita Okunrin</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Son of the king of the city of Ofin</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Asiwaju Orisa</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Enigmatic one</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>A ba ni wa ija</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Leader of the <span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span>s<span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Bi a o rida</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>He who looks for strife and fight</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Ma pa okuta si il<span class="small">&#233;</span> <span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span> mi o</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Whether people want it or not</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Laalu tare wa</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Do not tear down the house of my power</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><a id="page_61"></a><i>Tare sasa owo</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Oh, the one of great renown, bring good things</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Tare sasa <span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span> nla nla</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Bring plenty of money</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Iku, arun, ofo ki o</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Bring plenty of power</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Ma je tiwa o</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>So that death, sickness and loss</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> alaketu</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Are not to be found amongst us</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Ara Ketu</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>, king of Ketu</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#192;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span> mi dowo re o</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Great citizen of Ketu</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><span class="small">&#160;</span></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>My power is in your hands</i></p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="h3">our mysterious world</p>
<p class="indent">Our world, Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span>, is endowed with an indwelling spirit just as everything in existence possesses a spirit and a consciousness. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is a philosophy of consciousness and character that contains the wisdom and knowledge of all the shards or elements of consciousness that are spread throughout the visible and invisible world.</p>
<p class="indent">In order to make the philosophy of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> more intelligible to Western readers, we can refer to the consideration of the consciousness of spirits and plants in the works of Paracelsus, or read Giordano Bruno<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s speculations concerning the energetic bonds between different forms of consciousnesses and his lengthy discourse concerning how images are endowed with the consciousness of light, which gives them form and direction. We might also see a tendency towards pantheism in If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, reminiscent of Spinoza. In relation to his pantheism, Spinoza introduced concepts such as <span class="small">&#8216;</span>thinking substance<span class="small">&#8217;</span> and <span class="small">&#8216;</span>extended substance,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> which he used to explain how dualism was an experience and not necessarily a real experience in the ideal sense. This form of pantheism presumes a division between the supranatural and the natural, in which nature is perceived as an extension of God wherein we can see God in every grain of sand and every rose petal. But there is a qualitative difference between the emanation of the godhead and the godhead itself, as there is a difference between the parts and the full picture. If we read Goethe, Schiller and Emerson alongside Spinoza, it is possible to find a philosophical field that resonates with If<span class="small">&#225;</span> to a certain extent.</p>
<p class="indent">If<span class="small">&#225;</span> places the utmost importance on <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> (consciousness) and sees everything that exists as possessing consciousness. Consciousness is associated with light, rays and dreams, and emanates from the source of everything that exists. Therefore <a id="page_62"></a>we are in a deep communion with all kingdoms <span class="small">&#8211;</span> animal, vegetable and mineral <span class="small">&#8211;</span> as well as with the invisible world, because everything that exists contains the consciousness of its divine source and, as a result, all are made in the divine image. Thus everything that possesses consciousness can become as God when it is <span class="small">&#8216;</span>worked<span class="small">&#8217;</span> towards alignment with its source. This indicates that an awareness of the visible and invisible realms should be constantly trained and cultivated, as it is from this that a perception of how all things are connected will be gradually acquired.</p>
<p class="indent">We have seen that the presence of spiritual forces on earth came both from the right side and the left, which speaks of an inherent polarity necessary for creation to be sustained and to produce energy. This polarity is inherent in everything, to such a degree that If<span class="small">&#225;</span> philosophy maintains that everything that exists holds positive and negative reflexes of its singular consciousness. This is as true for plants and men as much as it is for spiritual beings.</p>
<p class="indent">We have seen how the spiritual beings known as <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> are extensions of higher and more pure forces. This is similar to the concept of the golden chain in Plato<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s <i>Timaeus</i>, as adopted by hermetic philosophers and alchemists in the late middle ages and the renaissance. The theory considered emanations as a chain descending from the pure realm of ideas to their manifestation on earth. As they descended their impurity increased, hence spirit in matter was experienced as a paradox and a dualism, when it was in truth a field established between source and reflection.</p>
<p class="h3">tradition and initiation</p>
<p class="indent">If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is a traditional faith, a philosophy and not a religion in the Western sense. The theology of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is part of its philosophy; this lies at the root of any expression of <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> cult or religion in the New World, whether Lucumi, Sango Cult or Candombl<span class="small">&#233;</span>. This is made possible by the theological idealism that forms part of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> philosophy. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> itself will always be defined as <i>esin</i>, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>to follow the ways of the land,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> and not as a religious institution. The custodians of the ways of the land are diviners and prophets who ensure that we maintain the traditional flow of wisdom. A tradition is not something that has been passed down for a few generations; it goes deeper than this.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_63"></a>Tradition must express some particular facets to be rightly referred to as such, or else it is a pretender to tradition, a pseudo-tradition. A tradition proper is lodged in primordial knowledge that reveals itself in a particular world view. The world view that rises from traditional If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is one that invites a certain hierarchy and order, where the extremes in creation are balanced by men and women as natural holders of the mystery of existence. It reveals that there is an order at play which we replicate in the simple structure of ancestry where the father looks to the grandfather for advice, just as the child looks to its parents. In this way wisdom is preserved by those living the mystery we know as life.</p>
<p class="indent">It is this succession of ancestral knowledge accumulated by experiencing life that enables us to connect with spirit and realize our divine potential, so that we can become <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>, a unique shard of consciousness. In the religious expressions which take If<span class="small">&#225;</span> as their philosophical foundation, we find a separation between the two ideas of ancestry, or <i>eg<span class="small">&#249;</span>n</i>, and <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>. The latter is usually deified into an unattainable ideal and takes the form of gods and goddesses, while <i>eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i> is something murky, ancestral, often volatile and sometimes dangerous. There is nothing inherently wrong with these definitions, but it is important to understand that the two are intimately linked, because a human being who lives a remarkable life and harvests abundance will become <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>. This concept is not very different to that of the Greek heroes who were elevated to the status of gods, or the process of beatitude in which a human being was elevated to sainthood. Another parallel can be found in Boehme<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s <i>Mysterium Magnum</i>, wherein we read:</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent"><span class="small">&#8230;</span> the creation of the angels has a beginning, but the forces from which they were created never knew a beginning, but were present at the birth of the eternal beginning <span class="small">&#8230;</span> They are born of the revealed Word, out of the eternal, dark, fiery, and luminous nature, from desire for divine revelation, and have been turned into <span class="small">&#8216;</span>creatured<span class="small">&#8217;</span> images.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Or, as Ren<span class="small">&#233;</span> Gu<span class="small">&#233;</span>non commented in regard to this paragraph: <span class="small">&#8216;</span>fragmented into isolated creatures.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> This means that angels represent ideas in the divine reason that have been revealed as specific <span class="small">&#8216;</span>images<span class="small">&#8217;</span> or parts of the godhead. In other words: planets, stars, and spiritual forces such as the <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i> possess a specific and restricted light that expresses its nature, just as animals, vegetables and minerals do.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_64"></a>Boehme appears to express a view of creation similar to that which we find in If<span class="small">&#225;</span>. The <span class="small">&#8216;</span>forces<span class="small">&#8217;</span> he speaks of are clearly synonymous with the energetic fabric of creation, which in If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is known as <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i>. <i>Od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> are the energy patterns of creation that cause the spiritual existence known as <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>m<span class="small">&#x0273;</span>l<span class="small">&#x0275;</span></i> (splendrous brightness) to be brought forth in an invisible state. This gives birth to its visible condition in <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#7885;</span>l<span class="small">&#7865;</span></i>, which reveals itself in the light of stars and planetary bodies. On earth these energetic patterns, all 256 of them, express different types of consciousness. These take the form of different personalities which express a relationship with a particular <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>. From this, we derive the concept of all humans being sons and daughters of one <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> or another, a rustic aspiration that can be refined into a pure and unique expression of a divine form.</p>
<p class="indent">The concept of <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> must be understood as an ideal, and at the same time as a return. It is a specific field of consciousness that we aspire towards. The human condition is what makes this ascent possible. In light of this, ideas such as the <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i> being angry with us, or taking punitive forms, are in reality the results of misalignment. Such situations occur because men tend to measure the world using their own ego and mundane station as a rule and compass for desire and accomplishment. If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, on the other hand, holds that developing good character will enable us to break out of this narrow perception of who we are, and aspire to become <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>. In summary, we all have the seed of <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>, and the way we walk the world will either bring it forth or drive us into forgetfulness.</p>
<p class="indent">These ideas are replicated in initiation in If<span class="small">&#225;</span> or to any given <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>. Initiation is usually referred to as <i>igb<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span></i>, meaning <span class="small">&#8216;</span>forest of the womb,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> or <span class="small">&#8216;</span>forest of mystery.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> This term makes reference to a sacred place in the woods where the rays of <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> are present in a such way that they effect a subtle change in the initiate which brings dramatic consequences. These sacred places can be created by those who possess the secrets to call <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> to radiate at a specific location. The ritual is then conducted in a rhythm of concealment and exposure to the mysteries which are being worked, which literally washes the seed within in blood and herbs so that the indwelling <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> can start to take shape and grow in the individual undergoing initiation. He or she is introduced to the fundamental vibration of creation, as a specific ray is worked and then lodged within the initiate, who becomes the <i>ol<span class="small">&#8217;</span> <span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> of a given force when the ritual is completed. The fertilisation of this seed is completed with a <i>daf<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> (reading) that specifies how the person can best cultivate this power in his or her life, and begin the process of becoming what <a id="page_65"></a>he or she holds. Initiation is a beginning, it marks someone who holds a power and is on their way towards integrating it. The way in which life is lived following initiation either brings one closer to what one holds until one becomes it, or more distant until it is lost.</p>
<p class="indent">Awo Fa<span class="small">&#39;</span>lokun Fatunmbi relates <i>igb<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> to the idea of <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>g<span class="small">&#242;</span>k<span class="small">&#232;</span></i>, which we can translate as <span class="small">&#8216;</span>ascension.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> <i><span class="small">&#204;</span>g<span class="small">&#242;</span>k<span class="small">&#232;</span></i> refers to our breaking through the limits of mundane individual consciousness towards the source, as a result of the process of initiation, which opens us up so that our divine seed and potential can blossom into a more mature realization of our divine providence/provenance. This is accomplished when <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span> in<span class="small">&#250;</span></i> or the <span class="small">&#8216;</span>inner self<span class="small">&#8217;</span> forms a link with <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>ponri</i>, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>the higher self.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> When this occurs, the link with <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> is made on a supreme level and the <i>ol<span class="small">&#8217;</span> <span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> becomes a manifestation of one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>. In metaphysical terms, this means that the <i>ol<span class="small">&#8217;</span> <span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> is looking upwards, towards the source, to form a link with the tangible expression of the divine ideas that rest in mystery. The <i>ol<span class="small">&#8217;</span> <span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> becomes a natural expression of a pattern of creation, a consciousness brought by <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> and expressed in unique ways through one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s alignment with the source, as one sets the process of becoming <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> into motion through initiation. The process is mediated by <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>, the spirit of wisdom, and <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;&#249;</span>, and the matrix of creation encoded in the 256 <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span>s</i>.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>