<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en-US">
<head>
<link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<title>IF&#x00C1;: A Forest of Mystery</title>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<p class="chaptitle"><a id="page_85"></a>&#593;e art of divination</p>
<p class="noindent"><a id="page_86"></a>As we have seen, If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is rooted in a noetic philosophy, which psychologist William James described in <i>The Varieties of Religious Experience</i> (1902) as:</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent"><span class="small">&#8230;</span> states of insight into depths of truth unplumbed by the discursive intellect. They are illuminations, revelations, full of significance and importance, all inarticulate though they remain; and as a rule they carry with them a curious sense of authority.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Within this philosophical stance is found a cosmology of emanations that takes into account everything visible and invisible that exists in a cosmos of commonality, time and timelessness. Forces eternal and temporal, visible and invisible, enter into relationships in which influences, bonds and patterns are forged, made and remade constantly. It is a <span class="small">&#8216;</span>repetition of difference,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> to borrow a term from French philosopher Gilles Deleuze, whose empirical metaphilosophy might be applied to what actually occurs when <i>daf<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> or If<span class="small">&#225;</span> divination is performed.</p>
<p class="indent">Deleuze questions whether difference depends upon identity, and whether identity is not in truth caused by difference. In doing this, he applies the hermetic axiom of <span class="small">&#8216;</span>as above, so below<span class="small">&#8217;</span> but in reverse. This leads him to conceive of the difference as being <span class="small">&#8216;</span>virtual<span class="small">&#8217;</span> in the sense of being real without necessarily being actualized as such. Deleuze takes the Platonic forms, the world of ideas, and makes them subject to experience, and through this differential relationships are generated, so creating space and time. The cosmos resembles origami in its constant folding and unfolding of a singular substance in a process of differentiation, which makes his idea of God a constant play of forces. Hence his paradoxical allegory: pluralism equals monism. These thoughts are interesting in respect to the principles at play in If<span class="small">&#225;</span> divination, because it is an oracle that predicts by looking backwards and perceives differences playing themselves out. These differences are always <span class="small">&#8216;</span>virtual<span class="small">&#8217;</span> and need to be acted upon in order to bring out their possibilities.</p>
<p class="indent">There are several good books about If<span class="small">&#225;</span> divination, such as William Bascom<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s seminal study, <i>If<span class="small">&#225;</span> Divination</i>, F<span class="small">&#225;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#237;</span>n<span class="small">&#224;</span> F<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>d<span class="small">&#233;</span><span class="small">&#8217;</span>s I<i>f<span class="small">&#225;</span>: The Key to its Understanding</i> and Fa<span class="small">&#39;</span>lokun Fatunmbi<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s <i>Awo</i> and <i>Daf<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> . Those interested in understanding the complexity involved in If<span class="small">&#225;</span> divination beyond what I discuss in this chapter are encouraged to study these books.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="page_87"></a>divining the past to read the future</p>
<p class="indent">If<span class="small">&#225;</span> divination is based upon recognizing a given cosmic pattern, which is revealed in a sequence of <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> that provide a diagnosis of the situation at hand. The interpretation of the patterns is found in the corpus of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, in the many verses that contain myths, riddles, songs, enchantments and advice of every kind related to each of the 16 <i>m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span> od<span class="small">&#249;</span>s</i> and the 240 combination <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span>s</i>. The diviner needs to possess an intimate understanding of the metaphysical nature of each sign, as well as of the prayers, stories, allegories and recommendations pertaining to each of the 256 <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span>s</i>. This means that what is revealed are patterns that have precedents in the past. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> reveals both the original forces and the way in which these forces have been managed and understood through the lives of men and <span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s over time, establishing a storehouse of ancestral memory that speaks of how cosmic patterns manifest and evolve. This means that If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is not an oracle that sees the future, but one that predicts the development and outcome of a situation through knowledge of how these energies manifested in the past. For instance, a large number of verses begin by stating the name of the client who came to a particular diviner for a reading. These represent encoded messages regarding the problem that are found in the name of the client, and its solution, found in the name of the diviner. These are expounded upon in the verse, where the diagnosis is a<span class="small">&#64259;</span>rmed and a solution offered in the form of a sacrifice. Let us take an example from one verse from <i><span class="small">&#210;</span>d<span class="small">&#237;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i>:</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent"><i>At<span class="small">&#7865;</span>l<span class="small">&#7865;</span>w<span class="small">&#x025A;</span> Abinutelu divined If<span class="small">&#225;</span> for It<span class="small">&#7865;</span>r<span class="small">&#7865;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>They said his ideas would always materialize;</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Therefore he mu<span class="small">&#64262;</span> sacrifice nails</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Three he-goats and three co<span class="small">&#601;</span>s</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>It<span class="small">&#7865;</span>r<span class="small">&#7865;</span> did as he was told and made sacrifice</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>They prepared If<span class="small">&#225;</span> leaves for him to drink</i></p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Everything in the verse can be subject to exegesis. For instance, the name of the <i>awo</i> could be read as the <span class="small">&#8216;</span>richness of the palm tree disperses enemies,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> whilst <i>It<span class="small">&#7865;</span>r<span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> means <span class="small">&#8216;</span>a field that seeks to attract good fortune.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> We have here a preliminary diagnosis and solution already expressed in the client presenting his barren crops as the problem, the <i>awo</i> in identifying this problem as having its root <a id="page_88"></a>in enemies, and that the solution in the palm tree. In order to know exactly what is involved in the solution, a profound knowledge of the qualities of the palm, its stories, myths and placement in the If<span class="small">&#225;</span> corpus is needed in order to bring forth what the client needs. In this, If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is telling the client that he has good potential for success, but that he needs something that restores his belief in himself. The solution is stated to be nails, three goats and three cocks. Again it is necessary to understand the force a combination of nails, goats and roosters generates; which in this case would be a reference to <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n and <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>. A sacrifice should be made to <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, and then be left with <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> where three roads meet (<i>ikor<span class="small">&#237;</span>ta meta</i>), but goats and roosters also hold a specific <i><span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> of protection and strength, which is needed to help the client attract good fortune. The verse states that he did as instructed and was given If<span class="small">&#225;</span> leaves to drink. Whenever If<span class="small">&#225;</span> states that a client did as If<span class="small">&#225;</span> recommended, it demonstrates a person of good character with a willingness to perform the most di<span class="small">&#64259;</span>cult sacrifice, namely to change one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s attitude and accept advice. The preparation of the If<span class="small">&#225;</span> medicine, a herbal infusion in this case, would indicate that a part of the problem might also be biological, physical or psychological; hence the administration of a medicine to enhance the effect of sacrifice and thereby attract good fortune.</p>
<p class="indent">In other words, if a client comes for a reading and this <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> appears, the client is repeating a pattern that people before him experienced and found solutions for, thus the solutions of the same problem in the past are applied to the same situation in the present. If<span class="small">&#225;</span> divination is a process in which Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span> is looking back at itself.</p>
<p class="indent">The process of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> divination is carried out with tools from the forest, but all of these tools hold a meaning that surpasses their mundane function and reveals a mirror of a cosmic syntax and order at play. The <i>awo</i> can use several oracles like <i>obi</i>, <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>p<span class="small">&#x0275;</span>l<span class="small">&#x0275;</span></i> or <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>k<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i>, and all are based on the same cosmic rhythm. Let us take the divination in which <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>k<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i> are used. These are sacred palm nuts taken from a close relative of the palm oil tree called <i><span class="small">&#7885;</span>p<span class="small">&#7865;</span> If<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> (<i>Elaeis guineensis</i>). This tree is of tremendous importance due to its inablity to lie or deceive; hence the <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>k<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i> represents truth given from an upright character, symbolized by the firm and erect stature of the <i><span class="small">&#7884;</span>p<span class="small">&#7865;</span> If<span class="small">&#225;</span></i>. The <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>k<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i> are stored in the <i>ajere If<span class="small">&#225;</span></i>, a closed calabash, usually spherical, and are used together with the <i><span class="small">&#7885;</span>p<span class="small">&#7885;</span>n If<span class="small">&#225;</span></i>, the divination tray, <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>y<span class="small">&#x0275;</span>r<span class="small">&#242;</span>s<span class="small">&#249;</span>n</i>, the divination powder, and <i>oruke</i>, the If<span class="small">&#225;</span> tapper. The <i><span class="small">&#7885;</span>p<span class="small">&#7885;</span>n</i> represents the world, visible and invisible: Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span>, the place we know as our world. The <i><span class="small">&#7885;</span>p<span class="small">&#7885;</span>n</i> is <a id="page_89"></a>a mirror of the heavens, and therefore we find the tray divided into four domains similar to those which we find in astrology, with the axis from ascendant and to the west and the axis from midheaven to the south, marking the four principal energies in creation. These four quarters are typified by <span class="small">&#x011a;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> and <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> watching the divination from up to down and from down to up, which is why you find <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> at the top on some divination trays and on the bottom on others. What is done on the opon is subject to the attention of the watchful eyes of spiritual beings, the eyes of Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>d<span class="small">&#249;</span>mar<span class="small">&#232;</span>.</p>
<p class="indent">The <i><span class="small">&#7885;</span>p<span class="small">&#7885;</span>n</i> is sprinkled with <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>y<span class="small">&#x0275;</span>r<span class="small">&#242;</span>s<span class="small">&#249;</span>n</i>, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> and <span class="small">&#x011a;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> are called as the oracle is manipulated, <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span>s</i> are traced in the <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>y<span class="small">&#x0275;</span>r<span class="small">&#242;</span>s<span class="small">&#249;</span>n</i> as they are summoned forth, and the tongue of the diviner is anointed with palm oil and honey in the process. The manipulation of the <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>k<span class="small">&#237;</span>ns</i> is carried out by rolling them back and forth in the hands; they are grabbed with the right hand from the left, until one or two nuts remain in the left hand. If two nuts remain, a single line is marked; and if one nut remains, a double line is marked. This process is carried out eight times until a double grid of four markings is formed in the <i>iy<span class="small">&#7865;</span>rosun</i>, which designates the reading ready for interpretation.</p>
<p class="indent">In addition to the <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>k<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i>, another divination tool, the <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>p<span class="small">&#x0275;</span>l<span class="small">&#x0275;</span></i>, is used along with <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>b<span class="small">&#242;</span></i>, the pathfinder. The <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>b<span class="small">&#242;</span></i> is presided over by <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>, and consists of several items, such as broken shards, bones, knuckles, sacred seeds and cowry shells. This gives the orientation of the reading, meaning the source of fortune or misfortune. It also helps define the temperament of the reading, accurately indicating what type of fortune or misfortune is at play in the situation enacted on the <i><span class="small">&#7885;</span>p<span class="small">&#7885;</span>n</i>. As such, the <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>b<span class="small">&#242;</span></i> is important in discovering the precise nature of a given situation and in doing so will give greater accuracy to its solution, helping to show what can be done to fortify what is good and transform what is negative into good fortune.</p>
<p class="indent">If<span class="small">&#225;</span> traces the markings from right to left and, as we have seen, the two sides hold great meaning. As well as being the side that denominates and calls forth spirits of strength and possible malefica, the left is also the female side, and the column of signs which speaks of the past. This female/male and past/present dichotomy is not only assigned to left and right but also to top and bottom. It is ultimately a reflection of the dynamic between absence and presence, as in this example:</p>
<table cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" class="table" width="80%" style="margin-left:20%;">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><a id="page_90"></a><span class="small">&#160;</span></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para">I</p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>In<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> (fire)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para">Masculine</p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><span class="small">&#160;</span></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><span class="small">&#160;</span></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><span class="small">&#160;</span></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para">I</p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>&#x0041;&#x0066;&#x1EB9;&#x0301;&#x1EB9;&#x0301;&#x0066;&#x1EB9;&#x0301;</i> (air)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><span class="small">&#160;</span></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para">I</p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Omi</i> (water)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><span class="small">&#160;</span><span class="small">&#160;</span>Feminine</p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><span class="small">&#160;</span></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><span class="small">&#160;</span></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><span class="small">&#160;</span></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para">I</p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span>/Il<span class="small">&#233;</span></i> (earth)</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="indent">As we see in this row of <i><span class="small">&#200;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span> Ogb<span class="small">&#232;</span></i>, all the elements are balanced, hence this sign is associated with an abundance of light. If the row was all double lines, we would have <i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>y<span class="small">&#x0275;</span>k<span class="small">&#250;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i>, which denotes the absence of light. The presence and absence of light affects the elements and generates contrasts and a great variety of possibilities that manifest in patterns, energies, situations, ideas, sentiments and thoughts.</p>
<p class="indent">Four marks are known as a leg. An If<span class="small">&#225;</span> divination always calls upon two legs (<i>m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i>), so we have a movement from past to present, from cause to situation. From this, an additional <i>m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i> is marked to arrive at a firm identification of the situation and appropriate solutions to the matter.</p>
<p class="indent">If<span class="small">&#225;</span> divination works on the basis of randomization in conformity with the hermetic axiom <span class="small">&#8216;</span>as above, so below,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> but reversed. Hence the dynamic between one <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>k<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i> left in the palm resulting in a double line, and two <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>k<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i> giving a single line on the <i><span class="small">&#7885;</span>p<span class="small">&#7885;</span>n</i>. The design that appears is then mediated by the <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>b<span class="small">&#242;</span></i>, which accurately defines the cause of the situation. For instance, a cowry shell can represent good fortune, a bone can mean death, a broken shard loss, an If<span class="small">&#225;</span> bead may hold a promise of abundance, and so forth. The <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>b<span class="small">&#242;</span>s</i> are manipulated with the same frame of mind as in the reading itself. There are various ways of doing this, and one of them is to have the client juggling two <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>b<span class="small">&#242;</span>s</i>, one representing good fortune (<i>ire</i>) and another representing its absence (<i>ibi</i>) and then hiding one in each palm. The <i>awo</i> will then cast the <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>p<span class="small">&#x0275;</span>l<span class="small">&#x0275;</span></i> or use <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>k<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i> to determine which hand to open and thus reveal the path of the configuration of <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span>s</i> appearing on the opon. This is elected by throwing two <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span>s</i>, which will indicate which hand is to be opened by order of seniority. Again a reversal is noticed as, when the first <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i>, to the right, is senior to the second <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i>, to the left, it is the left hand which is opened to reveal <i>ire</i> or <i>ibi</i>, and vice versa. This is important because it reveals the state of mind which the client brings to the <i><span class="small">&#7885;</span>p<span class="small">&#7885;</span>n</i>, and sheds light on the specific issues which should be addressed in the consultation.</p>
<p class="indent">An If<span class="small">&#225;</span> consultation is similar to having one with a doctor, philosopher, and psychologist, but all at the same time. The diagnosis of the problem is important, <a id="page_91"></a>but so too is the good conversation about what the reading shows to the <i>awo</i> and the client. An If<span class="small">&#225;</span> consultation is a harmonious gathering of two forces, the situation and its solution.</p>
<p class="h3">the structure of the divination verses</p>
<p class="indent">Abimb<span class="small">&#7885;</span>la (1997: 43) states that <i><span class="small">&#7865;</span>s<span class="small">&#7865;</span> If<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> is historical in content, and that its structure is derived from its historical nature. The <i><span class="small">&#7865;</span>s<span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> (verses) commonly follow an eightfold structure, mirroring the eight signs that makes up an <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i>, although there are some that deviate from this either by contracting a verse into a smaller message, or extending the rhythm of the poetry to great length. Again, following Abimb<span class="small">&#7885;</span>la, the most common feature of an If<span class="small">&#225;</span> verse is the presentation of the identity of the diviner in its first part. The name of the diviner can be that of a human being, a spiritual force, a plant or an animal. Some of these names can be quite obscure as they represent the nature of the situation in terms of the form of knowledge that is at play in the verse. The second part names the client. This follows a similar idea: it can be a plant, animal, deity, human being, or even a community that presents a situation to be resolved. The pulse of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is present in the names of the diviner and the client, which are meaningful for imparting an idea of the energy encoded in the <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i>. The right side represents the diviner and the left side the client in a meeting of solutions that represents the fundamental dynamic in <i><span class="small">&#200;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span> Ogb<span class="small">&#232;</span></i> and <i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>y<span class="small">&#x0275;</span>k<span class="small">&#250;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j<span class="small">&#236;</span></i>, present and past, light and its absence. The third part of the verse gives a description of the situation, and the fourth provides the solutions. The fifth part states whether or not the client complied with the advice of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, whilst the sixth imparts the consequences of the attitude expressed in the previous one. The seventh part brings a certain lesson, and the final part brings the moral of the verse into a conclusion of the events that played themselves out between two forces coming together to resolve a situation. Abimb<span class="small">&#7885;</span>la gives several examples of this, and I give one of his examples here to illustrate the inherent dynamic within the verses (ibid: 58):</p>
<div class="block">
<p class="noindent">I: <i>Friendship does not bind three,</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Friendship binds only two</i></p>
<p class="noindent">II: <i>If<span class="small">&#225;</span> divination was performed for S<span class="small">&#243;</span>or<span class="small">&#243;</span>y<span class="small">&#232;</span></i> (<i>a chief</i>)</p>
<p class="noindent"><a id="page_92"></a><i>The son of those who practiced If<span class="small">&#225;</span> divination and farming</i></p>
<p class="noindent">III: <i>He was asked to perform a sacrifice</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>So that he might have money</i></p>
<p class="noindent">IV: <i>He was asked to offer as sacrifice</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Two fast-moving rats,</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Two fishes that swim with grace</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Two hens with big livers</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Two goats heavy with foetus</i></p>
<p class="noindent">V: <i>He offered all these as sacrifice</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>After he offered the sacrifice</i></p>
<p class="noindent">VI: <i>He became prosperous</i></p>
<p class="noindent">VII: <i>He started to praise his If<span class="small">&#225;</span> priests</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>While his If<span class="small">&#225;</span> priests praised If<span class="small">&#225;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>As he opened his mouth</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>He uttered forth the song of If<span class="small">&#225;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>As he stretched his legs</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>Dance caught them</i></p>
<p class="noindent">VIII: <i>He said</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>It is now time for If<span class="small">&#225;</span></i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>To turn my house into a market place</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I practised If<span class="small">&#225;</span> divination</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>And I practised farming</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>My lot must be better</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>It is now time</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>For me to be prosperous</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>I practised If<span class="small">&#225;</span> divination</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>And I practised farming</i></p>
<p class="noindent"><i>My lot must be better</i></p>
</div>
<p class="indent">In this example, we can see that the name of the diviner implies that the client has a tendency to spread himself out too much; he should limit his activities to only two things, namely If<span class="small">&#225;</span> and farming. The problem is stated as being one of lack of money, and the solution is a sacrifice. The elements of sacrifice represent energies and harbingers of precise powers of good fortune that the client will attract to his life. In other words, the sacrifice of <span class="small">&#8216;</span>two fishes that swim <a id="page_93"></a>with grace<span class="small">&#8217;</span> is not only about giving an offering to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>, Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja, or Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun, who are amongst the spiritual powers who elevate the sacrifice of fish into an energetic ray, but it is also a call for the client to be more elegant in his actions. Every sacrifice holds dimensions concerned with our behaviour and attitudes. For instance, in this case, the sacrifice of the two rats signals that a sacrifice to the <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#x0276;</span>s</i> (witches) is prescribed, but it might also speak of the need for the client to sacrifice certain ratlike forms of behaviour, whilst maintaining the speed and agility of the rat. In this way, the recommended sacrifice in its multiple dimensions prescribes a remedy that always involves a change of attitude, or seeks to reinforce already present attitudes, as well as serving as food for spiritual forces and the community. In the sixth part of the verse, we see the consequences of his sacrifice, he became prosperous, and the last two parts impart the lesson and moral of the verse, which are quite straightforward here, but which can be cryptic in other cases.</p>
<p class="indent">All If<span class="small">&#225;</span> verses contain additional information, prayers, or enchantments, but they all follow the rhythm of <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> and as such the intonation and the division of the words are always meaningful in so far as they replicate a very specific cosmic resonance and ray. This means that the diviner and client recreate a situation that has precedents in the past and bring them into the present so that predictions can be made about the future.</p>
<p class="h3">the importance of allegories and storytelling</p>
<p class="indent">We hear various accounts of the number of verses ascribed to each of the 256 <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span>s</i>, the most common being that each of them has sixteen verses, which gives a total of 4096 verses, although some say that there are far more. In other words, If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is a living tradition and its wisdom is still being accumulated. The repetition of difference is ongoing, and as each new tone and shade accrues to the basic energy, verses are added to the corpus.</p>
<p class="indent">This is rooted in the dynamic of the divination itself, in which a diviner who manifests a given principle in a particular way encounters a client who mirrors this dynamic. Hence it is vital for If<span class="small">&#225;</span> divination that the communication which takes place in the sacred space should establish new understandings upon the bones of precedence.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_94"></a>Some verses can seem enigmatic, such as when a plant, tree or weed represents the diviner, and the client is represented by an animal; or when <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> himself appears as the client asking advice from a spiritual force or a plant. We have many dimensions here, rooted in the belief that everything is connected, and that we can experience the entire variety of divine manifestations in the cycle of rebirth. To be reborn as a human being is significant, because in these incarnations we are ascending towards our divinity and treading the path of becoming <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>. This also means that we hold the memory of plant and beast, mineral and spiritual force tied into the energetic constitution of our divine becoming. A plant is not inferior to a human being, nor is a spiritual force superior in quality, but rather in function. The plant and the spiritual forces are always connected through accomplished beings, no matter what realm they belong to.</p>
<p class="indent">Everything is rooted in <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i>: a given energy can provide a great number of narratives rooted in the same cosmic ray. Actors, geography and time are factors of change, but <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> remains the same. Nature is a flux and a pulse mediated by these secure poles of ancestral wisdom, anchored in heaven. We follow patterns that have already been laid down, and in this way we facilitate a variation of the same meetings that have always happened. And in this the beauty and wisdom of <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span> If<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> is to be found, because If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is a dance of energetic forms in meetings, benign and not so benign, with the purpose of growth and understanding so we can understand natural harmony better and live in accordance with it.</p>
<p class="h3">the meaning of sacrifice</p>
<p class="indent"><i><span class="small">&#7864;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i>, sacrifice, is routinely associated with life force offerings, but this is a very limited perception of what it entails. In fact, If<span class="small">&#225;</span> is quite adamant that effective <i><span class="small">&#7865;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i> starts with a change in attitude, a realization of the necessity of change and of holding realistic expectations. <i><span class="small">&#7864;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i> is performed in order to improve something that is already promising, to bring about new opportunities, or to diminish the effects of negative currents.</p>
<p class="indent">Sacrifice can be made in order to bring good fortune to a journey or a business venture, or in the search for a good spouse, or for general well being; but it always comes with the direction to the client to pay attention to the signs. In other words, <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> is always present in the design.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_95"></a>Being so many things, <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> is the divine tongue, the seed of passion and desire that communicates with the world and between the worlds so we can accumulate wisdom. Wisdom, like sacrifice, is accumulated, like a divine sap which we allow to flow and that fills us with life and yearning. <i><span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>nd<span class="small">&#225;</span> m<span class="small">&#233;</span>j&igrave;</i> says the following about <i><span class="small">&#7865;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i>:</p>
<table cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" class="table">
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Igi gb<span class="small">&#237;</span>gbe m<span class="small">&#224;</span> l<span class="small">&#233;</span> g<span class="small">&#224;</span>nr<span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>A dried up tree stands upright but has no dignity</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Igi gb<span class="small">&#237;</span>gbe ni<span class="small">&#242;</span> n<span class="small">&#237;</span> t<span class="small">&#242;</span>t<span class="small">&#242;</span></i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Dry trees have no sap</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>D<span class="small">&#237;</span><span class="small">&#225;</span> f<span class="small">&#249;</span>n <span class="small">&#7864;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>This If<span class="small">&#225;</span> declared to <span class="small">&#7864;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>T<span class="small">&#237;</span><span class="small">&#237;</span> s<span class="small">&#8217;</span>omo won l<span class="small">&#243;</span>de <span class="small">&#210;</span>gb<span class="small">&#243;</span>l<span class="small">&#250;</span></i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>The offspring of</i><span class="small">&#8216;</span><i>The city of accumulated wisdom</i><span class="small">&#8217;</span></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Al<span class="small">&#225;</span>r<span class="small">&#224;</span>, n<span class="small">&#237;</span>bo l<span class="small">&#8217;</span><span class="small">&#7864;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span><span class="small">&#243;</span> w<span class="small">&#224;</span></i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Creator, I ask where is <span class="small">&#7864;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span>?</i></p></td>
</tr>
<tr valign="top">
<td><p class="tab_para"><i>Enu <span class="small">&#232;</span>n<span class="small">&#236;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span>n l<span class="small">&#8217;</span><span class="small">&#7864;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span><span class="small">&#243;</span> w<span class="small">&#224;</span></i></p></td>
<td><p class="tab_para"><i><span class="small">&#7864;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span> is the mouth of human beings</i></p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="indent">Sacrifice starts with giving verbal form to what rests in our <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i>. The mouth represents the portal, the door to our <i>or<span class="small">&#236;</span></i>. It is through this door that we express our wishes, because words are expressions of our desires and thus are a vehicle for manifestation. On this basis If<span class="small">&#225;</span> initiates are advised to bless everyone, to always speak good things and to refrain from gossip and negative speech in general. This is tied in to the moral dimensions of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, which are concerned with the importance of always being truthful and stating the facts. Lies, deceit and gossip are considered the beginnings of misfortune because what we give shape to in our words naturally seeks manifestation.</p>
<p class="indent">In this form of <i><span class="small">&#7865;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i>, the <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>bo</i>, we make sacrifice to fortify good fortune. These forms of sacrifice can be as simple as a change of attitude and the offering of prayers and song to a given spiritual force, in which the tongue is directly fed with materials that sweeten our words or give them strength. This form of sacrifice is a constant theme in If<span class="small">&#225;</span> with its emphasis on prayers, songs and enchantments. All successful sacrifice starts with a clear verbal a<span class="small">&#64259;</span>rmation. There is a great difference between thoughts and words. Our thoughts are mere potentiality until they are given a voice and a name, and in this they hatch out into energies and forces that make them grow towards strength and materialization. This form of <i><span class="small">&#7865;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i> is done by the <i>awo</i> every day when he or she gets up in the morning and gives praise to the <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i>. The <i>awo</i> begins every day with verbal a<span class="small">&#64259;</span>rmations of his or her blessed state, because by doing so he or she can be a source for blessings and good fortune to others.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_96"></a><i><span class="small">&#200;</span>t<span class="small">&#249;</span>t<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> is the sacrifice for turning a wicked situation into a positive one. It can be performed for an individual or on behalf of a community. At times this transformation can involve complex passages and steps. This form of <i><span class="small">&#7865;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i> is often given to malevolent spirits or to <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> who have expressed their negative rays, and it serves to appease them.</p>
<p class="indent"><i><span class="small">&#7864;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i> is the common sacrificial rite that involves <i>adimu</i>, food offerings, and life force offerings to <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>, and is the form of sacrifice usually associated with the word <i><span class="small">&#7865;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i>.</p>
<p class="indent"><i><span class="small">&#204;</span>p<span class="small">&#232;</span>s<span class="small">&#232;</span></i> are special kinds of sacrifice offered to the <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#x0276;</span>s</i> or witches. These are offerings aimed at appeasing these turbulent forces, which can also be used as a mediating act to gain their favour. Sacrifice can be made to witches in cases when someone is a<span class="small">&#64260;</span>icted by the <i>ajog<span class="small">&#250;</span>ns</i>, which takes the form of general misfortune, or by <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#x0276;</span>s</i>, which can be recognized by emotional and mental imbalance and turbulence. <i><span class="small">&#204;</span>p<span class="small">&#232;</span>s<span class="small">&#232;</span></i> can then be offered as a way to remove these negative influences and thus restore equilibrium.</p>
<p class="h3">elements of sacrifice</p>
<p class="indent">The elements of sacrifice are many and varied, drawn from the mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms. They are carefully selected after a situation has been defined and its remedy established. All these items are related to <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> as well as to <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> and <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>m<span class="small">&#x0273;</span>l<span class="small">&#x0275;</span></i>. The elements of sacrifice can be used both in their material form and as examples of attitude and presence of spirit that need to be enhanced or diminished. To put it simply, if an If<span class="small">&#225;</span> divination calls for the sacrifice of a sheep, it will speak of the need to focus on this energy, both as a communion and in the form of attitude and aptitude. In practice it can signify that the sacrifice of a sheep to a given spiritual force and the consumption of the meat of the sacrificed animal will open roads to good fortune and block misfortune, but it can also speak of a certain attitude associated with the sheep that must be addressed. It should be mentioned that the meat is used to feed the community, and that any lifeforce offering is venerated prior to giving up its <i><span class="small">&#232;</span>m<span class="small">&#237;</span></i>, or breath. In this way, lifeforce offerings as made by the Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> people follow a similar pattern to that found amongst the followers of the Mosaic faith with their kosher sacrifice, or the Muslims with their halal sacrifice.</p>
<p class="hang_para1"><a id="page_97"></a><b><i><span class="small">&#7864;</span>l&#x1EB9;&#x0301;d<span class="small">&#x0275;</span></i></b> (pig) is used to bring the blessing of children and an increase of comfort in one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s life, as it softens what is crooked and erratic. It is sacred to Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>, <span class="small">&#204;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span>m<span class="small">&#237;</span> and <span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> Oko.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#192;</span>g<span class="small">&#249;</span>nt<span class="small">&#224;</span>n</i></b> (sheep) is important for the <i>funfun</i> <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i> and for such cults as Agemo, which is related to the Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n cult, and for Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja. It is said to hold properties that ward off death, and can be used in rites for the temporary resuscitation of the dead.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i>Ew<span class="small">&#250;</span>r<span class="small">&#233;</span></i></b> (she-goat) is a very common sacrificial element which can be offered to all female forces, <span class="small">&#7884;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span>, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> and <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>. It is considered to bring stability, protection and general good fortune to the community involved in giving the offering.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>b<span class="small">&#250;</span>k<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i></b> (he-goat) is used when force and fire are needed to invest one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s aspiration with power and direction. It is particularly sacred to the hunter spirits and is often used in initiations for male spiritual forces.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i>Eranla</i></b> (cow) is sacred to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> and the <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span>m<span class="small">&#237;</span>s</i>. It brings prosperity and wealth, especially through trade, and is an energy that can stimulate pregnancy.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i>Erinla</i></b> (bull) is used to bring stability to earth and is sacred to Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n and <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>nil<span class="small">&#233;</span>. Just as this energy stabilizes the earth, it also stabilizes our life.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i>Agb<span class="small">&#242;</span></i></b> (ram) has a very red nature and is used in works of defence, strength and transformation. It has deep connections with <span class="small">&#7884;</span>ya, <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n and Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n in its capacity of appeasing the ancestors.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i>Aj<span class="small">&#225;</span></i></b> (dog) is particularly sacred to <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n and <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>nil<span class="small">&#233;</span>, and induces serenity and majesty in the hunter spirits.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#210;</span>k<span class="small">&#233;</span>t<span class="small">&#233;</span></i></b> (rat) is used to appease nearly any form or force that has become turbulent. It can also be used to both placate and agitate red powers. It is a great sacrifice to give to the <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#x0276;</span>s</i> and will, together with palm oil, appease any dissonance generated by them and thus provide blessings in place of ordeals.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i>P<span class="small">&#x0276;</span>p<span class="small">&#x0276;</span>y<span class="small">&#7865;</span></i></b> (duck) is sacred to <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> and Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja and calms the mind and nerves as well as neutralising the negative thoughts of others. It holds the <i><span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> of opening the gates of honour and recognition.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#7864;</span>t<span class="small">&#249;</span></i></b> (guineafowl) is one of the most praised sacrificial offerings, given its connection with initiation, elevation, position and prestige. It is a sacred bird for <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> and many others. It is a symbol of the <i>iyawo</i>, the newly initiated, to whom it gives good fortune, prestige and fearlessness.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><a id="page_98"></a><b><i>Ad<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i></b> (hen) is said to possess the power of transforming our perspectives and brings health and equilibrium to the material realm. It appeases hostile forces and it brings out the strength of benevolent ones. To some extent the colours of the hen are attributed to given domains in respect to the three colours black, red and white, but its essential properties remain the same.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#7864;</span>y<span class="small">&#7865;</span>le</i></b> (pigeon) represents prosperity, peace and long life as well as honour and loyalty. The white pigeon is especially revered, being sacred to hunters, <i>eboras</i> and <i>funfun <span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i> alike. The wood pigeon is believed to hold quite different properties and is said to facilitate possession and bring the powers of <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>j<span class="small">&#x0276;</span></i>.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#192;</span>k<span class="small">&#249;</span>k<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i></b> (rooster) is of importance to most male <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i>, and in particular the hunters <span class="small">&#8211;</span> <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un, <span class="small">&#7884;</span>bal<span class="small">&#250;</span>way<span class="small">&#233;</span>, <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> <span class="small">&#8211;</span> and many others in its capacity of providing radical defence and protection.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#204;</span>j<span class="small">&#224;</span>p<span class="small">&#225;</span></i></b> (tortoise) is a sacrifice that is made in order to be granted access to secrets. It is particularly sacred to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n, <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> and Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja, and is said to induce supernatural powers and provide diligence and protection.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#204;</span>gb<span class="small">&#237;</span>n</i></b> (snail) is sacred to all <i>funfun</i> spirits and in particular to Od<span class="small">&#249;</span>, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> and <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>. It is the most esteemed agent for inducing peace and tranquillity and is the most highly praised food for consciousness and creativity. The snail also possesses medicinal properties and is a powerful antidote against infections and fevers, as well as being a remedy for even the most serious of situations in its capacity to restore tranquility where there is turbulence.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#7864;</span>ja</i></b> (fish) and in particular <i><span class="small">&#7865;</span>ja aro</i> (mudfish) are used to ward off death and to bestow longevity. Since fish live in shoals, they are used to combat loneliness and as a foundation for gravitation towards kin and peers. Naturally it holds the power of bringing wealth, being sacred to Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun and Y<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>m<span class="small">&#7885;</span>ja. The mud-fish is sacred to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>r<span class="small">&#250;</span>nm<span class="small">&#236;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span> in its capacity of endurance and its ability to live both on land and in the waters.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#7864;</span>yin ad<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i></b> (egg) possesses cleansing and protective properties and is particularly sacred to the <span class="small">&#204;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span>m<span class="small">&#237;</span> and <span class="small">&#7884;</span>gb<span class="small">&#x0273;</span>ni. Eggs can be given to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span>un and <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n when circumstances dictate; but are taboo for many spiritual forces.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i>Efun</i></b> (white chalk) is sacred to all <i>funfun <span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>s</i>, such as <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>, Ol<span class="small">&#243;</span>kun, <span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> Oko and <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i>. It is used to attract good fortune, in particular luck and money. <b><i>Os<span class="small">&#249;</span>n</i></b> (camwood) is a red powder that is used both for healing and to agitate spirits. It is sacred to <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>, Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n, <span class="small">&#204;</span>y<span class="small">&#224;</span>m<span class="small">&#237;</span> and all red spirits.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><a id="page_99"></a><b><i>Egb<span class="small">&#242;</span></i></b> (tubers) are sacred to <span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> Oko, Eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n and Obal<span class="small">&#250;</span>way<span class="small">&#233;</span>. Not only do they possess stabilizing properties themselves, but they also remind the powers that uphold the stability of earth that we who eat them intend to uphold stability.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#200;</span>k<span class="small">&#249;</span>y<span class="small">&#225;</span></i></b> (vegetables) are used for protection and to reinforce our allegiance with nature.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#7864;</span>mu</i></b> (palm wine) is a cleanser and stimulant and is especially appreciated by <span class="small">&#210;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span> Oko, <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>s<span class="small">&#225;</span>ny<span class="small">&#236;</span>n, <span class="small">&#210;</span>g<span class="small">&#250;</span>n and <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span>. It can be given to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> in moderate portions in order to stimulate creativity.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i>Iy<span class="small">&#x025A;</span></i></b> (salt) is used to invigorate <i><span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> and to build a defence. It is sacred to most red forces and also to <i>or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i>, in which it serves to strengthen our connection with the source and firm up our determination.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i>Or<span class="small">&#237;</span></i></b> (shea butter) represents consciousness and in particular a good, calm consciousness.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#204;</span>r<span class="small">&#232;</span>k<span class="small">&#233;</span></i></b> (sugarcane) is particularly sacred to <i>eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i> and is considered to open doors through which prosperity may enter in the form of agility, good health and business opportunities.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>g<span class="small">&#x0275;</span>d<span class="small">&#x0275;</span></i></b> (plantain) is sacred to <i>eg<span class="small">&#250;</span>ng<span class="small">&#250;</span>n</i>, as well as to <span class="small">&#7864;</span>gb<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>, and provides the power of longevity and maintains our healthy connection with our peers in <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>run. It is used to attract prestige and good partners, whether in marriage or business.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#192;</span>gb<span class="small">&#7885;</span>n</i></b> (coconut) is seen as the vehicle of good character and induces stability and clarity. The <i><span class="small">&#224;</span>gb<span class="small">&#7885;</span>n</i> represents Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span>.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i>Ir<span class="small">&#249;</span></i></b> (cooked locust beans) are used in several <i>adimu</i> or food offerings that serve to placate spiritual forces and strengthen the <i><span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> of good fortune, like <i><span class="small">&#232;</span>kuru</i>.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#192;</span>m<span class="small">&#224;</span>l<span class="small">&#224;</span></i></b> (cooked yam flour) is used to appease hot forces. It is a food given in order to become more directed and focused.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#x011a;</span>k<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i></b> (cooked white corn flour) is used to attract good fortune and bring about a clear and calm state of mind.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#211;</span>w<span class="small">&#243;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span>y<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i></b> (cowry shells) represent money. They represent sacrifice as much as protection and the need to give value and attention to what we are doing. This offering always involves the arrival of good fortune, but also the need to develop some form of protection, as good fortune coming to one person can sometimes cause the envy of a friend.</p>
<p class="indent1"><a id="page_100"></a>The elements of sacrifice that are regularly used, not only as a part of larger <i><span class="small">&#7865;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i> but also for the weekly practice of If<span class="small">&#225;</span>, are as follows:</p>
<p class="hang_para1"><b><i>At<span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#225;</span>r<span class="small">&#233;</span></i></b> (alligator pepper) represents the power of the word and determination. It is particularly sacred to <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> and is used to feed the tongue when incantations or enchantments are used.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i>Omi tutu</i></b> (cold water) is a healing agent, used as a libation to honour the earth and make her cool and calm. Cold water prepares the ritual space as it creates a calm ambience.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#7884;</span>t<span class="small">&#237;</span></i></b> (gin) forms a constant part of all work done with spiritual forces due to its capacity to quicken <i><span class="small">&#224;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#7865;</span></i> and allow it to spread out. <i><span class="small">&#7884;</span>t<span class="small">&#237;</span></i> doesn<span class="small">&#8217;</span>t refer only to gin, but to any high proof white spirit.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i>Oyin</i></b> (honey) is used to bring sweetness to life, and as a reminder of fate and destiny. Honey is the taste of our destiny.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i><span class="small">&#7864;</span>p<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i></b> (palm oil) is used as a substitute for blood and represents the invigorating flow of power in our life.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i>Ob<span class="small">&#237;</span></i></b> (kola nut) is frequently used, as it holds the virtue of warding off illness and death and for its ability to generate harmonious gatherings and stimulate friendships.</p>
<p class="hang_para"><b><i>Or<span class="small">&#243;</span>gb<span class="small">&#243;</span></i></b> (bitter kola nut) represents the closed calabash, the world united and perfected. In tasting its bitterness we are reminded that we can choose to sweeten the world with honey.</p>
<p class="indent1">The practice of sacrifice makes us aware of being, life, rhythms and the soul of Ay<span class="small">&#233;</span>. For example, if you offer cold water to the earth and pray for a calm mind as you sing to <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>nil<span class="small">&#233;</span>, these simple actions involve a connection with water and earth as a means to still one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s thoughts and be present.</p>
<p class="h3">the practice of sacrifice</p>
<p class="indent">The cycle of earth is one of birth, gestation, maturation and death followed by re-emergence; everything that is found on earth is bound to this cycle, even human beings. <i>Ajog<span class="small">&#250;</span>ns</i> are a part of creation. Baba <span class="small">&#7864;</span>l<span class="small">&#x00eb;</span>buib<span class="small">&#7885;</span>n commented in <i>The Healing Power of Sacrifice</i> (2000) that these malefic powers entered the world at <a id="page_101"></a>the moment when the first person who could discern good from bad chose the latter. Sacrifice is necessary to maintain balance between the opposing forces emanating from the One, because it is only in opposition that the One is supported. It is only by sacrifice that we can maintain focus on our goal. The <i>ajog<span class="small">&#250;</span>ns</i> are not our enemies, they are forces which appear in our life when we turn upon ourselves and embark upon the process of becoming our own worst enemy.</p>
<p class="indent">If<span class="small">&#225;</span> relentlessly stresses that we are born good and blessed, but as we enter the world and undergo socialization and conditioning, we gain the experience of struggle, evil and defeat. This constitutes part of the human journey, as does sacrifice. Sacrifice can be understood as an action performed in order to bring harmony and balance. Sacrifice can be a change of attitude, whether to give up certain negative patterns, to feed a spirit with food, drinks and blood; just as it can be about initiation from other spirits, which will then accumulate the necessary wisdom to bring one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s life into balance, so that one can pursue one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s happy fate. The very idea of sacrifice tells us that imbalance is unwanted, and also that everything in the world is included in this dynamic.</p>
<p class="indent">The greatest sacrifice is always about giving up patterns and attitudes that impair our good fortune, which was demonstrated at the beginning of this chapter by the example of <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#243;</span>or<span class="small">&#243;</span>y<span class="small">&#232;</span>. His main problem was in the way he gave attention to the people around him, and so he was advised to change this. He did so and offered up <i><span class="small">&#7865;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i> to spirit in order to align a particular spiritual flow with the change of attitude to which he had committed himself, and was thus granted blessings and good fortune. In other words, he sacrificed his attitude, and this attitude became his taboo, his way of ensuring that good fortune would flow.</p>
<p class="indent">All sacrifice starts with the mouth. It forms words to describe the pain or problem experienced and prayers or oaths. Words lead to action because words are symbols that bring together all kingdoms and all worlds, visible and invisible, to the place of sacrifice. Sacrifice is to give up something. When we call a plant, animal, stone or spirit to the place of sacrifice, it is in order to accomplish balance and harmony for the one who is in search of his or her good fortune. This gives us some perspective to the entire concept of <i><span class="small">&#7865;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i>, where the one who performs it is asked to give up his or her bad ways, or to avoid certain things. Sacrifice is about engineering the cycle of life in the spirit of wisdom; the pulse of wisdom is found in contraction and expansion, inhalation and exhalation. If we have brought together representatives of all the kingdoms to partake in <a id="page_102"></a>the sacrifice, we also need to share it with the community. The intent behind the sacrifice must be demonstrated, and the elements of the sacrifice must be distributed amongst the community, visible and invisible, to generate the necessary flow and flux that provides the anticipated return, manifesting in good fortune for everyone and everything involved. Sacrifice reminds us of how we are interdependent, we always need community, whether it consists of a few people or many, to enable us to spread our goodness. Community is important, and so is what we distribute in our community, so let us always spread goodness where we are, because to walk the world elegantly, gracefully and full of goodness is the greatest <i><span class="small">&#7865;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i> we can ever practice.</p>
<p class="h3">the mystery of taboo</p>
<p class="indent"><i><span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#232;</span>w<span class="small">&#x025A;</span></i> (taboo) is an important concept, which is often misrepresented, because of its closeness to the concept of <i><span class="small">&#x0275;</span>s<span class="small">&#x0275;</span></i>, which means <span class="small">&#8216;</span>to chose to do what is bad in spite of knowing what is good.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> <i><span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#232;</span>w<span class="small">&#x025A;</span></i> is actually closer in meaning to sacrifice, <span class="small">&#8216;</span>to give up something,<span class="small">&#8217;</span> than it is to the word <span class="small">&#8216;</span>taboo<span class="small">&#8217;</span> as we use it, which has come to mean <span class="small">&#8216;</span>something forbidden.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> A Yor<span class="small">&#249;</span>b<span class="small">&#225;</span> proverb states: <i><span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#232;</span>w<span class="small">&#x025A;</span> d<span class="small">&#249;</span>n ju oyin l<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i>, meaning: <span class="small">&#8216;</span>Taboo is sweeter than honey.<span class="small">&#8217;</span> Taboos are given because they block the ways in which <i>ajog<span class="small">&#250;</span>ns</i> may interfere with your life and create negative conditions. Therefore, when it comes to taboo, what is good for one person might be bad for another. Taboos can be permanent or transitory, they can be related to od<span class="small">&#249;</span>s that arise in initiations, or be given in relationship to <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> and the spiritual forces of ancestry, <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> and family. Taboos mark the way towards abundance.</p>
<p class="indent"><i><span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#232;</span>w<span class="small">&#x025A;</span></i> can be given because it jeopardizes the health of body, soul or mind, because it impairs our bio-circuit, or because the forbidden food or objects serve as a gateway for inviting possession by spirits, and as such is set aside for specific circumstances. What is forbidden becomes part of the generation of a specific energy; through its deliberate absence, good fortune arrives.</p>
<p class="indent">Let us look at some taboos and the reasoning behind them. Let us say that a person going through initiation to <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> is told in his <i>daf<span class="small">&#225;</span></i> that he has been given a taboo against wearing uniforms, dressing in red and eating chilli peppers. A taboo such as this has precedents in the corpus of If<span class="small">&#225;</span> in relation to the particular <i>od<span class="small">&#249;</span></i> that comes up, which would speak of the abuse of power and the inability to <a id="page_103"></a>keep one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s emotions calm. This follows a quite logical reasoning that <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> typifies the warlord, and that abuse of power is one of the traits found in his stories. While <span class="small">&#7778;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span>ng<span class="small">&#243;</span> most certainly possesses other more elegant and peaceful aspects, if these taboos come up, it will demonstrate that the <i>iyawo</i> (the newly initiated) has a strong connection with the fire that tends towards burning too hot. Hence the taboo against wearing uniform serves as a reminder of how power can invite the <i>ajog<span class="small">&#250;</span>ns</i> in, and the colour red and chilli peppers serve as a reminder of not allowing one<span class="small">&#8217;</span>s passions to get out of control.</p>
<p class="indent">There are taboos which are more di<span class="small">&#64259;</span>cult to understand, such as those against eating potatoes, peanuts, or beans. When they apply to the vegetable or animal kingdom, taboos are trifold; they can be given because of a spiritual force we are in relationship with, or because they generate a disturbance in our bio-circuit on a spiritual level, or simply because they are harmful to our health. If the food taboo is related to a spiritual force, it is given because avoiding the item will generate a more direct spiritual flow. This can be understood by realizing that <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i> also have their taboos, for instance, <span class="small">&#200;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#249;</span> is denied hot peppers, as this will agitate his natural fire, and <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span> is denied palm oil, as it will invigorate his state of impeccable and stable whiteness in negative ways. To continue the example with <span class="small">&#x00d4;</span>b<span class="small">&#224;</span>t<span class="small">&#225;</span>l<span class="small">&#225;</span>, if we make <i><span class="small">&#7865;</span>b<span class="small">&#7885;</span></i> involving this force we can use white chalk, snails, water, yams <span class="small">&#8211;</span> but never corn and rarely blood. If we add these items to the sacrifice we create a distortion in the communication and manifestation of the presence. It is the same for <i><span class="small">&#232;</span><span class="small">&#232;</span>w<span class="small">&#x025A;</span></i> given in initiations, certain items are forbidden because they impede and cloud <i><span class="small">&#236;</span>p<span class="small">&#242;</span>nr<span class="small">&#237;</span></i>, the link between the visible and invisible realms. In the Diaspora religions it is not uncommon to hear that the breaking of taboo leads to the anger of the <i><span class="small">&#242;</span>r<span class="small">&#236;</span><span class="small">&#7779;</span><span class="small">&#224;</span></i>; this is not true, but it does lead to the vinculum we hold in many directions being shaken.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>