<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Star.Ships</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_1"></a>
<p class="chapa" style="margin-left: 92px;"><i>A new scientific discovery does not triumph by convincing its opponents and making them see the light, but rather because its opponents eventually die, and a new generation grows up that is familiar with it</i>.<br/>Max Planck, <i>Scientific Autobiography and Other Papers</i></p>
<table>
<tr>
<td valign="top"><p class="chaptitle1"><b>I</b></p></td><td valign="top"><p class="chaptitle1q"><b>ONE FUNERAL AT A TIME</b></p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="indent" style="margin-top:2em;">Scientific enquiry&#x2019;s cherished claims of impartial, objective truth have certainly seen better days. After more than two decades helming the august <i>New England Journal of Medicine</i>, outgoing editor-in-chief, Dr Marcia Angell, said in the January 2009 <i>New York Review of Books</i> that &#x2018;it is simply no longer possible to believe much of the clinical research that is published.&#x2019; Science is now so riddled with corporate self-interest and falsified experiment data that <i>Nature</i> reported that retractions have increased tenfold in the last decade, the tip of the iceberg. The replicability of even the simplest of experimental results is at an all-time low and getting lower. Casting aside the enormous ontological implications of this we are nevertheless told, as we have been for more than a century, that the edges of the map are being filled in.</p>
<p class="indent">Corporeal power has always been the ice-cold hand inside science&#x2019;s latex glove, waiting for you at the airport customs desk. It has never been the objective, absolutely true descriptor of reality that science journalists and other people with severely
<a id="page_2"></a>
limited understandings of science claim it to be. Like all metanarratives of power, it is an unreliable narrator of incomplete utility.</p>
<p class="indent">In an act curiously resonant of initiation into the Classical mystery traditions, it is in acknowledging science&#x2019;s inherent unreliability, its limitations, that we restore its true utility. This is nowhere more necessary than in history and the story of mankind.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>DANGEROUS ROADS</b></p>
<p class="indent">The historical is supremely political, supremely personal. There is a reason the stories of a culture are always kept with its priests. To tell someone where they are from is to tell someone who they are. A slave, a weaker gender, a god-king&#x2019;s subject, a sinner, too brown-skinned to understand property ownership.</p>
<p class="indent">Whilst the casual observer may conclude the battle for historical authenticity is a post-imperial one, this is not wholly true. It was an imperial battle when Europe&#x2019;s empires spanned the globe, but only because that is how Power was organised in the era of mercantile expansion. Today, historical narratives &#x2013; justification narratives &#x2013; emerge from more modern sources of power. It is the same story, told by different storytellers. History may well be written by the victors, but victors change and if we do not unwrite history then the propaganda from the previous regime still stands.</p>
<p class="indent">Despite the weight of evidence supporting an origin for rice cultivation in Taiwan and Island Southeast Asia before its subsequent onshoring onto the mainland, there is fierce resistance to these <i>observable facts</i> inside China. It is politically and racially repugnant that such an important innovation emerged first among those funny-faced island savages. And so it is largely ignored.</p>
<p class="indent">Israel&#x2019;s well-funded archaeological programme expands in lock-step with the growth of her illegal settlements, providing subtextual legitimacy for the Likud party&#x2019;s aim of restoring her biblical borders. Take a closer look behind the confident archaeological headlines, however, and you often find evidence ranging from the tenuous to the spurious.</p>
<p class="indent">The subcontinent provides the most tragically complete examples of the inextricability of power and history. In seeking to restore Dravidian and early Tamil culture to its true scope and antiquity, it has become a lightning rod for separatist politicians. Partition had the effect of placing most of the important Harappan and Indus sites inside a new country with a cultural and political regime that exhibits considerable hostility to non-Muslim historical narratives, meaning both academic access to and even basic upkeep of probably the most important sites of early urbanisation on the planet have been woefully neglected.</p>
<p class="indent">As for India herself, we have the &#x2018;here again, gone again&#x2019; story of the Aryan invasion.
<a id="page_3"></a>
Based on the complete misidentification of a few skeletons in the upper layers of Mohenjo Daro and a European refusal to believe that a people so brown could have given the world the Rig Veda, a fictitious invasion of lighter-skinned, charioteering &#x2018;Aryans&#x2019; around 1500 <small>BCE</small> was declared the source of Vedic culture. In the twentieth century, they were described as a hardy race who, like all good primitives, deified natural phenomena and called upon their aid in battles; the Vedas were their battle hymns. Because the &#x2018;Aryan invasion&#x2019; theory is not only racist but completely wrong, it has been quietly abandoned by the majority of scholars. However, this has left Indologists with what we might call the Jenga Paradox: the foundational bricks of the theory have been removed, but no one wants to admit such actions bring down the entire tower. It is how we can end up with straight-faced analyses such as this one, from Ariel Glucklich, theology professor at Georgetown, writing in <i>The Strides of Vishnu</i> as late as 2008:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">The subjects of the Indo-Aryan controversy were energetic and rambunctious people who probably arrived gradually from central and western Asia. They have been called Aryans (from <i>arya</i>, &#x2018;hospitable one&#x2019;), but this should not be taken as an ethnic term. &#x2018;Indo-Aryan&#x2019; is the somewhat more precise linguistic category that most scholars today prefer to use. As noted, the majority of scholars today, largely on the basis of linguistic evidence (for example, the absence of South Asian linguistic characteristics such as retroflection west of India), do support the migration hypothesis. The arrival of the Indo-Aryans probably took several centuries and was mostly peaceful, and evidence indicates that a genuine cultural exchange took place as they encountered indigenous populations, including the late phases of the Harappa culture. Few archaeological remains attest to the material culture of the mobile population or to the events of those centuries &#x2026; Virtually everything we know about these extraordinary people derives from their prolific literary output &#x2013; primarily the Rig Veda.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">To recap, there are no historical remains for this large-scale migration and the only evidence to support it comes from the documents created by this evidence-free culture. You can see the circular logic. Further problematising the lack of archaeological evidence is the growing genetic evidence of internal cultural continuity between the Harappan and later cultures, and the singular lack of genetic evidence for a large-scale migration of a people from who-knows-where between 1750 <small>BCE</small> and 850 <small>BCE</small>.</p>
<p class="indent">As for any attempts to trace stories into or out of India (or anywhere else, for that matter), the Platonic form of nationalism is always there. Returning to Dr Doniger:</p>
<a id="page_4"></a>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">Tale-tracking has political implications. Tellers tend to regard their own culture as the source and other cultures as the borrowers and to deny that they themselves have borrowed from other cultures, for reasons of status and hierarchy: to be upstream, to be the giver rather than the receiver, is to be superior. (Recall the old Soviet claims that Russians invented the telephone, etc.) Outside the culture, British (and German) scholars may well have been inspired to trace stories back to India (and China: the colonies), in part as an outgrowth of the nineteenth-century craze for origins (the source of the Nile, the source of Language [itself an old search, as in Herodotus&#x2019;s experiment with the infant who said &#x2018;bread&#x2019; in Phrygian]) but also as a way of feminizing these cultures, as David Henry Hwang reminded us in <i>M. Butterfly</i>: &#x2018;The East is feminine &#x2013; weak, delicate, poor &#x2026; but good at art and full of inscrutable wisdom &#x2013; the feminine mystique.&#x2019; They tell good stories, but they need us to run their country. This was also a way of privileging the past of India over its present, as Sanskrit and the ancient Vedas were valued over vernacular languages and contemporary, &#x2018;idolatrous,&#x2019; Hinduism: the thinking becomes, they used to tell great stories, but they need us now to run their country.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">The Indus question will be explored in considerable detail in later chapters. For now, it is important to be aware that into the post-imperial academic power vacuum created by the end of the Aryan Invasion Theory have poured great volumes of Indian nationalist sentiment, unbalancing the quest for historical authenticity in the opposite direction. And so we must navigate between &#x2018;the Vedas originated within the same cultural groups that gave us Harappa and the Indus cities&#x2019; (probably more right than wrong) and &#x2018;India invented and exported everything&#x2019; (definitely more wrong than right).</p>
<p class="indent">These are dangerous roads, then. Dangerous as the people who travel them professionally.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>THE BUDDHAS&#x2019; REVENGE</b></p>
<p class="indent">Following the Taliban&#x2019;s appalling destruction of the Bamiyan Buddha statues in 2001, the editors of the prominent archaeology journal <i>Antiquity</i> did something very rare in academic publishing. They called out other forms of archaeological iconoclasm. They drew attention to a disordered house. They named names. They pointed fingers.</p>
<p class="indent">The editorial begins by shaming the non-publication of fieldwork results &#x2013; at the time more than 80% of Italian fieldwork remained unpublished and much of the two decades of findings from the American team at Abydos still remain unpublished.
<a id="page_5"></a>
Regarding the latter, I have my suspicions as to why, which we will come to in a later chapter.</p>
<p class="indent">It also highlights a refusal to allow other researchers access to sites or archived material, for fear that others will publish first. Mycenaean tomb excavation reports that sat unpublished for fifty years prevented half a century of additional research that could have been undertaken. And when other researchers are actually allowed access, supervisors often usurp the ideas of their junior team member. Then there is the &#x2018;ferocious and bullying reactions to the slightest criticism, aimed especially at intimidating young colleagues.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="indent">The final and most alarming finger-pointing goes to an even more serious problem. Outright fraud. There is the case of the Italian superintendent who took Mycenaean pottery sherds out of a museum store, then re-buried them in Tuscany so he could dig them back up again. Or the deputy director of the Tohoku Palaeolithic Institute in Japan, Shinichi Fujimura, who was videotaped burying artefacts to &#x2018;discover&#x2019; again. At the time, Fujimura had the nickname, &#x2018;God&#x2019;s Hands,&#x2019; for his amazing ability to unearth rare and significant artefacts. He admitted to placing 61 of the 65 pieces he had discovered, as well as all 29 of the pieces he had discovered the previous year. God&#x2019;s hands, indeed.</p>
<p class="indent">In the late nineties, Dr Anton Misfud reported that a cave painting of a bison bull on the wall of Malta&#x2019;s Hypogeum was &#x2018;removed at the express directive of the director of museums.&#x2019; The bison bull is, of course, an ice age inhabitant of Malta and its presence on the walls of the Hypogeum pushes its date of construction back from the Neolithic into the Palaeolithic. As would the cave paintings discovered <i>under</i> some fifteen thousand year old stalagmites in Ghar Hasan on Malta&#x2019;s south coast. These were also mysteriously destroyed and the cave was covered with a locked, metal gate &#x2018;to protect a colony of bats.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="indent">Malta has some of the Mediterranean&#x2019;s most astounding examples of early human culture and, as a result, has more than a century of highly dubious academic behaviour; misrepresenting chemical dating, swapping out older remains for younger ones and so on. In 1910, Sir Temi Zammit excavated the partial remains of more than 6000 people in the Hypogeum. By 1971, J. D. Evans, future Director of the Institute of Archaeology, lamented the loss of all but eleven skulls from the excavation. When Graham Hancock visited in 2001, there were only six left.</p>
<p class="indent">When Michael Cremo visited Ukraine&#x2019;s Dnepropetrovsk Historical Museum, the head of the archaeology collection, Dr Larisa Churilova, showed him artefacts that indicated an early Stone Age belief in reincarnation. Her reason for not publishing her findings was that the editors of journals are uncomfortable with cultural interpretations.
<a id="page_6"></a>
They just want to print things like &#x2018;a stone flake two centimetres long was found at a depth of one metre in the excavation.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="indent">If only it were so that editors found discomfort in cultural interpretations! The true source of discomfort arises from interpretations that step out of academia&#x2019;s specific cultural lens. After Michael Cremo, as part of an NBC documentary, was refused access to anomalous artefacts found in California gold mines and held at UC Berkeley, department archaeologist Jere H. Lipps attempted to stop the programme from being broadcast. Allison R. Palmer of the Institute for Cambrian Studies petitioned the Federal Communications Commission to fine NBC over the documentary.</p>
<p class="indent">Over the last century, a new power narrative has emerged that warps archaeological data into a specific shape the way a magnet affects iron filings. It is the unspoken belief that humanity is on a journey from <i>worse</i> to <i>better</i>, from primitive to complex, uncivilised to civilised. Our civilisation of perpetual war, total surveillance, obesity, runaway mental illness, overmedication, environmental degradation, widespread unemployment and scientific materialism has nothing to learn from the past because it is better. Enjoy that smartphone made by suicidal Taiwanese slave labour. Continue shopping.</p>
<p class="indent">Ancient history has become the wartime propaganda for Darwinian scientism. Data that contradict Power&#x2019;s latest belief system are suppressed, destroyed, attacked or ignored.</p>
<p class="indent">Even if contemporary historians pay lip service to the notion that this is no longer always the case, in most instances this means they are simply unaware of their own scientism. Any attempts to consider our Palaeolithic ancestors as more advanced than previously thought still carries the patronising tone of a complete stranger complimenting the artwork of a handicapped child. &#x2018;Look at how clever our inferiors were,&#x2019; we say, as we die, fat and unhappy, waving our iPhones around for signal.</p>
<p class="indent">The magnet is still in effect, at least in terms of popular discourse. Nobody has rearranged the iron filings into a more accurate map.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>ARTIFICIAL HORIZONS</b></p>
<p class="indent">You may not know it, but your understanding of ancient history probably owes almost everything to one man, V. Gordon Childe. He is the man who, in the mid-twentieth century, gave us the three distinct phases of preindustrial society we all carry around in our heads. These are savagery, then barbarism, then civilisation.</p>
<p class="indent">Entirely artificial horizons were drawn based on what Childe considered to be the hallmarks of advancement from one stage to the next and then every single culture that is or ever was got dropped into them. V. Gordon Childe gave us the magnet.</p>
<a id="page_7"></a>
<p class="indent">Savages have very unpleasant and dangerous lives, foraging and killing exclusively wild foods. Today we use the more polite term, hunter-gatherer, but the subtextual unpleasantness &#x2013; the sense that these are lesser cultures leading largely miserable lives &#x2013; remains.</p>
<p class="indent">Savages progressed to the higher state of barbarism during a period Childe named the Neolithic Revolution. Barbarians domesticate animals and begin agriculture. This surplus of food allows for barbarian cultures to become more complex and diversify. Priests emerge; villages are created; megalithic sites are constructed; people own things. As for civilisation? That only happens with the birth of the city. Because it can get difficult to demarcate when a large town becomes a city, it is best if urbanisation occurs in conjunction with writing. Without writing, a culture is probably &#x2018;high barbarian&#x2019; at best. Sorry Incas.</p>
<p class="indent">It is because of Childe that we unthinkingly consider the Sumerians to be the first civilisation on earth, with Egypt and the Indus cultures getting the joint silver medal. At the time of the publication of Childe&#x2019;s seminal &#x2018;The Urban Revolution&#x2019; in 1950, Sumeria was the oldest known culture to have both cities and writing.</p>
<p class="indent">These, then, are our artificial horizons. Fall outside them and you are in danger of being erased at the &#x2018;express directive of the director of museums.&#x2019; Anthropology professor Michael E. Smith writes in 2009 that scholars today rarely cite Childe anymore, or even acknowledge his influence on their models. &#x2018;Nevertheless, the archaeological study of ancient complex societies is still dominated by the themes of urbanism, agricultural intensification and surplus, craft specialisation, social inequality, and the nature of power and state, each of which was first applied to archaeological data in a systematic fashion by V. Gordon Childe.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="indent">The secondary impact of Childe&#x2019;s artificial horizons is more noticeable to magicians than it is to fraudulent Japanese archaeologists, and is just as dangerous as the primary one. Childe&#x2019;s was the first &#x2018;explanation&#x2019; of progress that allowed cultural expression to be described in <i>exclusively material terms</i>. Stone circles were not constructed because of ecstatic communion with the gods, temples were not physical expressions of a profound devotional mythology. No. The inner motivations for outward cultural expression became entirely irrelevant, entirely redundant. Grain was stored, women were pregnant &#x2026; time to build a temple.</p>
<p class="indent">In the 1960s, functional explanations for urban development were popular. This held that as cultures became larger and more complex, leaders altruistically stepped forward to take on the task of organisation for the good of the group. It may be no surprise to see this mirrors the postwar expansion of the state and its building programmes; mass immunisation, free education, infrastructure investment and so
<a id="page_8"></a>
on. By the 1980s, a more &#x2018;political&#x2019; interpretation reigned. Here it was the whims of the self-serving elite which triggered the building projects of early states. Again, we can see Childe&#x2019;s functional explanation refracted through the worldview of the time: Margaret Thatcher and Gordon Gekko as rulers of trickle-down urbanisation. More recently, explanations rely on &#x2018;human-environmental&#x2019; interactions, which is why you cannot move for graduating theses that suggest &#x2018;ancient climate change&#x2019; was responsible for absolutely any cultural development or change that shows up anywhere in the archaeological record.</p>
<p class="indent">It is this ideological underpinning that Michael E. Smith is alluding to when he writes about V. Gordon Childe&#x2019;s invisible impact on anthropology. We now consider it &#x2018;scientific&#x2019; or &#x2018;professional&#x2019; to describe cultural artefacts &#x2013; non-physical objects &#x2013; in exclusively materialist terms. Only a functional analysis of the mythological process is allowed, which is like describing your grandmother&#x2019;s famous chicken soup solely by its molecular constituency.</p>
<p class="indent">According to Curtis White, Professor Emeritus of English at Illinois State, leaving these assumptions unexamined is dangerous. In the Spring 2014 issue of <i>Tricycle: The Buddhist Review</i>, Linda Heuman wrote in her article, &#x2018;The Science Delusion&#x2019;:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">In White&#x2019;s view, once scientism rewrites our story so that the things human beings care about &#x2013; like love, wonder, presence, or play &#x2013; are reduced to atoms, genes, or neurons, human lives become easy prey to corporate and political interests. We become &#x2018;mere functions within systems.&#x2019; White wants us to wake up and recognize that this view is not scientific discovery, it is ideology. Mistaking one for the other has profound consequences, &#x2018;not just for knowledge but even more importantly for how we live.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Cultural evolutionism suggests that man moves up to naturally higher stages of development. Some societies could thus be considered superior to others based on technological complexity. From an historical research perspective, it also means that the further back you go in time, then by definition, the <i>less</i> complex human culture becomes. Otherwise something was awry with Darwin&#x2019;s theories. Anthropology&#x2019;s timeline became fixed, unidirectional. Reducing the story of humanity to mechanics, the story of a human to brain reactions, is not science. It is ideology, the wolf dressed as the sheep.</p>
<p class="indent">Whilst it always had a home on the mental landscape of the magician, the notion that progress and civilisation are not the same thing has wider appeal today than at any time in the recent past. It is our sacred duty to lean forward into this change, to
<a id="page_9"></a>
ensure it has every chance of success. Without resorting to hoary tropes of the noble savage, it is self-evident to today&#x2019;s magicians that our distant ancestors also recognised that true depth of meaning in a human life goes beyond the physical, beyond the material effects that can be carbon dated. The Lascaux cave paintings are the tiniest tip of the largest iceberg, the scant physical extension of a non-physical realm so huge it dwarfs the sun. A materialist researcher can but stand before Lascaux&#x2019;s open cosmic doorway and announce &#x2018;we have no way of knowing what is behind it.&#x2019; Speak for yourself, mate.</p>
<p class="indent">Subsequent to the invention of Childe&#x2019;s artificial horizons, it emerged that the development of grain-based agriculture was an unmitigated disaster for human health and longevity. What Childe saw as an evolution is a <i>devolution</i>. Measuring the march of civilisation from this point, we see a succession of politico-economic systems that purported to improve human existence &#x2013; culminating in today&#x2019;s modern, materialist age &#x2013; that have most often had the complete opposite effect. Rather than getting ever closer, we have moved further away from genuine sources of meaning and purpose.</p>
<p class="indent">Instead of measuring a civilisation by its density of sprockets, what happens when we consider civilisation to be a collection of values, thoughts, mythologies? What happens when we count up the non-physical sprockets? The human journey ceases to look like a collection of trailers before the beginning of <i>The Internet: The Movie</i> and starts to wobble. We have been more civilised, we have been less civilised. Humanity looks like a toddler learning to walk, sometimes taking steps, sometimes falling down.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>&#x2018;HOLY LAND&#x2019; SYNDROME</b></p>
<p class="indent">Discoverer of G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe and its chief excavator, Dr Klaus Schmidt, famously warned against what he called &#x2018;Holy Land Syndrome,&#x2019; which is the propensity for archaeologists to head out into the field with a spade in one hand and a Bible in the other. Holy Land Syndrome precludes the finding of something you didn&#x2019;t already expect to find.</p>
<p class="indent">This is a problem stretching back centuries. Archaeology, emerging out of antiquarianism, itself emerging out of Grand Tour dilettantism, unfortunately predates geology and genetics. The belief that the stories told in the Bible are in some or any sense accurate forms the baseline mythology of the field. In the words of Robert Anton Wilson, &#x2018;what the thinker thinks, the prover proves.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="indent">Our understanding of how global cultures formed and are expressed has yet to be rebalanced. We have the implicit assumption that all major technologies have their origin in the Fertile Crescent, which was the first and only place we looked for them.
<a id="page_10"></a>
Even now, any suggestion that the observed cultural technology we associate with civilisation emerged anywhere outside this area is automatically on the back foot.</p>
<p class="indent">The twenty first century offers us a new Holy Land Syndrome. There is still the spade in one hand, but the Bible has been replaced with a very selective reading of <i>On the Origin of Species</i>. Science does not consider itself an ideology, as it claims to only deal with what is real. This is, of course, what every ideology thinks of itself. The complete hijacking of all non-physical criteria of being human in favour of the unfounded belief that we are meat robots, lacking in free will, has enormous implications for what it is the archaeologist actually finds. As she thinks, so she proves.</p>
<p class="indent">Right across the academic spectrum, the growth of STEM subjects (Science Technology Engineering Mathematics) has the unfortunate impact of closing down all ways of understanding or approaching truth that cannot be ultimately reduced to scientism&#x2019;s belief that only the material exists.</p>
<p class="indent">When it comes to the history of non-physical subjects like mythology and belief, this is putting the inmates in charge of the asylum. As Dr Naydler writes, &#x2018;in advocating that we explain religious phenomena in the nonreligious terms of the social sciences or linguistic anthropology, what is specifically religious is lost to view.&#x2019; Attempting to view the mythic &#x2018;objectively&#x2019; instantly destroys the subject one wishes to understand in the first place. However, attempting to view a mythic subject non-objectively in the academic arena is a recipe for career suicide. And so the academic treatment of the spiritual component of human life reduces the subject entirely to social and cultural conditions. Most academics end up where Mircea Eliade said they would:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">If these consequences are not always evident, it is because the majority of historians of religion defend themselves against the messages with which their documents are filled. This caution is understandable. One does not live with impunity in intimacy with &#x2018;foreign&#x2019; religious forms, which are sometimes extravagant and often terrible. But many historians end up by no longer taking seriously the spiritual worlds they study; they fall back on their personal religious faith, or they take refuge in a materialism or behaviorism impervious to every spiritual shock. Besides, excessive specialization allows a greater number of historians of religion to station themselves for the rest of their days in the sectors they have learned to frequent since their youth. And every &#x2018;specialization&#x2019; ends by making the religious forms banal; in the last instance it effaces their meaning.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Alexandre Afonso, a political economy lecturer at King&#x2019;s College London, points out that academia is almost identical to how drug cartels are economically organised;
<a id="page_11"></a>
with an expanding mass of outsiders and a shrinking core of insiders. Junior academics are prepared to forgo decent wages, job security and quality of life for the decreasingly likely chance of ending up in one of the few remaining tenured, top jobs.</p>
<p class="indent">With university budgets under pressure and the huge growth in PhDs, the economics of academia compounds a lot of the problems already inherent in its faintly ludicrous medieval structure. The man or woman at the top gets to have all the ideas, and your growth through the ranks is largely dependent on his opinion of you, which makes challenging his ideas increasingly risky. The result is a narrowing of perspectives down to as few as possible and the flight to research areas that have little risk of upending the prevailing paradigm. Consider this view from Eleanor Parker, a junior Oxford academic in Anglo-Saxon, and writer of the excellent blog, <i>A Clerk of Oxford</i>.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">[A]cademia is not always a happy place to work. I&#x2019;m a very junior academic, and to people in my position a career in academia offers a daunting future: a life of short-term contracts and little security, with very limited ability to plan ahead. You can probably imagine the psychological effects of this, and the impact it can have on one&#x2019;s confidence and sense of self-worth &#x2026; Most of my friends are also early career academics, in a similar position, and when I look at them I see talented young people consumed with anxiety and fear about the future, constantly doubting their value as scholars, and consequently as human beings. [..]</p>
<p class="quotei">The precarious nature of academic jobs is an endemic problem, perhaps not something individuals can do much about, but academics often don&#x2019;t help this pervading mood of anxiety by just not being very nice to each other &#x2026; Part of the fear of failure is feeling almost desperately dependent on the goodwill of more powerful people, without any control over the fate of your own work; reviewers and academic publishers, for instance, have a huge amount of power over my future, and I have no influence on them whatsoever. I have to get my work published if I ever want to get another job, so they&#x2019;re free to treat me however they want and I have to do as they ask, lest they decide to say &#x2018;actually, we won&#x2019;t publish this after all.&#x2019; That&#x2019;s a frightening situation to be in.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">This is how you end up with a field that buries artefacts pilfered from its own museums, or destroys ones that don&#x2019;t fit inside an exclusively materialist understanding of a facet of the human experience that can only be understood non-materially. This is how you get conservative incrementalism instead of bold publishing break-throughs, as the junior academics wonder where their next meal will come from. There is no history without historiography.</p>
<a id="page_12"></a>
<p class="h3"><b>STORIES WRITTEN IN BLOOD AND STONE</b></p>
<p class="indent">How are we to proceed if we do not wish to leave the story of us in such frequently slippery hands? This comes back to recognising the limitations of what scientific enquiry does and does not offer. Science values open-minded research but more often than not fails to get out of its own shadow and see the validity in alternate ways of thinking about the world.</p>
<p class="indent">Science locates its authority in its privileged access to &#x2018;the way things are.&#x2019; However, because it can occasionally generate repeatable data, it has assumed that its interpretations are equally Real, that everything comes out of the kitchen perfect and all carrots are always roasted and only served on Tuesdays. Further mutations of this error include the presumption that facts can be ignored if they fall outside the boundaries created through self-appointed expertise, as we have seen throughout this chapter. Particularly in historical research, interpretation has been elevated above hard facts in defining what does and does not exist. The medieval church egregore that birthed academia and still gives it its shape is never more visible than in these moments.</p>
<p class="indent">So we begin at this very point of failure; recognising the difference between facts and their interpretation. Unto the archaeologists and chemists do we render the generation of radio-carbon data. Unto no one do we render the interpretation of them, especially when it comes to subjects their reality maps do not permit to exist. In no way is this to suggest that we reject all but our own interpretation, it is indeed to suggest the opposite. We reject <i>all</i> monopolies of interpretation and invite a chorus of informed analysis.</p>
<p class="indent">The journey thus begins with an examination of the data themselves, data that are generated in systems that suffer the least from interpretive ideology. These are the ingredients that show up at the kitchen&#x2019;s back door, not just the ones that appear on scientism&#x2019;s &#x00E0; la carte lunch menu. You are now on a strict diet of fresh facts only.</p>
<p class="indent">Because there is a fundamental disconnect between the generation of facts and the generation of interpretations, these two concepts move at different speeds, regularly falling out of alignment with each other. A recalibration of interpretation on top of the latest accumulation of facts becomes episodically necessary.</p>
<p class="indent">These recalibrations have occurred numerous times in the history of western historical research, and are presumably a function of a healthy ideological ecosystem. One of the most effective methods of clearing the biblical Creationists out of the early days of the Academy was to invent and unilaterally declare a belief in gradualism. There could be no Flood because geological change happens very slowly, there could be no six days of Creation because evolution happens very slowly. In the medium term, this was probably a necessary move. However, it set geology back decades
<a id="page_13"></a>
because it turns out geological and climatic changes often do happen quickly and there have certainly been repeated worldwide floods of biblical proportion. The biological sciences are sadly still struggling to get out from underneath gradualist beliefs to a large extent, but their success in doing so requires bringing down Darwin&#x2019;s entire house of cards, so it is still a way off in the distance.</p>
<p class="indent">A second recalibration happened with the rise of postmodernism. Accompanying Childe&#x2019;s belief in the march of civilisation was the academic notion of diffusionism; the suggestion that technologies and sophisticated concepts occur in one &#x2018;better&#x2019; culture and spread to &#x2018;lesser&#x2019; ones. The Aryan Invasion Theory is a prime example of diffusionism. It carries with it some very unseemly, racial suggestions of the superiority of some groups over others and contributed to the European habit of stacking cultures into a hierarchy based on alarming and pointless criteria such as cranial fluid capacity and eyelid shape.</p>
<p class="indent">Like a mother separating her arguing children, postmodernism declared that everyone invented everything independently. Again, this was probably a necessary step on the way to de-racialising cultural analysis but it turns out there were a lot of babies in that bathwater. The limitations of this approach were almost immediately apparent but, by then, much of the damage was done.</p>
<p class="indent">The damage is typified in the problem of infinite regress. Fixating on individual contexts becomes smaller and smaller: one cannot make comparisons between cultures, one then cannot make comparisons between different locations within the culture, one then cannot make comparisons between different age groups within these locations, one cannot compare old women and young women, and so on. The result is to deny any shared basis between members of the same culture, to say nothing of humanity at large. Secondly, the atomisation of shared cultural experience led to the rise of a scientific materialist view of what might be shared between humans: you cannot make comparisons between Chinese and Malaysians, but &#x2018;rational thought&#x2019; is universal. For once, the hijack was accidental, but no less dangerous for being so.</p>
<p class="indent">As Doniger says, &#x2018;comparison defamiliarizes what we take for granted.&#x2019; Assumed universals such as rational thought or the experiences of gay men are quickly relativised. Indeed, any attempts to avoid comparison in cultural analysis fall into the logic trap of comparing the observer&#x2019;s culture to the one under examination. This is how one accidentally paints one&#x2019;s own eye instead of the subject under the microscope.</p>
<p class="indent">Besides, with the rise of globalisation and digital technology we can see first hand that ideas and technology certainly do spread between cultures in all directions, even ones with the same eyelid shape.</p>
<p class="indent">Indeed, the overall quest of this book is to fulfil the Sepik Revelation. To show that
<a id="page_14"></a>
stories and non-physical technology do indeed move between cultures and down through time. Perhaps a lot of time. To accomplish this while giving the widest possible berth to the skeletons hidden in diffusionism&#x2019;s closet requires more data and less interpretation. Hard data. It is very difficult for a silt layer or an erosion pattern to be racist. Base pair deletions on your DNA are not especially bothered with how good a Muslim you really are. And the stars? Well, the stars do not stop turning for anyone.</p>
<p class="indent">The incorporation of scientific data into metaphysical worldviews is a trackway not unknown to magic. Consider the words of Alan Moore in his essay, &#x2018;Fossil Angels&#x2019;:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">This role, that of an all-inclusive &#x2018;natural philosophy,&#x2019; obtained throughout the rise of classical civilization and could still be seen, albeit in more furtive fashion, as late as the 16th century, when the occult and mundane sciences were not yet so distinguishable as they are today. It would be surprising, for example, if John Dee did not allow his knowledge of astrology to colour his invaluable contributions to the art of navigation, or vice-versa. Not until the Age of Reason gradually prevented our belief in and thus contact with the gods that had sustained our predecessors did our fledgling sense of rationality identify the supernatural as a mere vestigial organ in the human corpus, obsolete and possibly diseased, best excised quickly.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">There is even more recent precedent worth considering. Whatever else you think of the Golden Dawn, Theosophy, the Society for Psychical Research and its individual adherents, these groups formed during an imperial knowledge explosion. They each reaccumulated the data of the observable facts and launched their interpretations from them. It is easy to forget that the first translations, the first appearances of foreign or ancient knowledge in western esoteric discourse, happened due to the diligence of individual occultists. Sometimes it is even easier to forget that these underlying facts require episodic updating, and we have not been very good at it, beyond a half-hearted nod at an interpretation of quantum physics that is itself seventy years old.</p>
<p class="indent">It is the very definition of the Western esoteric tradition to search for the wider philosophical implications of the latest dispatches from the front of the Real. Science excels at generating facts, but magic has been generating meaning for perhaps fifty thousand years. We have been lax.</p>
<p class="indent">To abandon interpretation to scientism is to shirk natural philosophy&#x2019;s most sacred duty. Your tribe deserves better. And if you feel some residual squeamishness over who has legitimacy of interpretation in our culture, consider this. We are wholly justified in turning the question on its head and asking the scientists what it is they think they are doing swimming in our pool in the first place.</p>
<a id="page_15"></a>
<p class="h3"><b>RESTORING MITHRAS: AN EXAMPLE</b></p>
<p class="indent">It continues to surprise those in the hard sciences just how much the unavoidable politics of the workplace extends into the actual subjects studied by their softer colleagues. Having encountered Dechend and Santillana&#x2019;s <i>Hamlet&#x2019;s Mill</i>, Italian physicist Giulio Magli endeavoured to write a more scientific paper looking for the possible prehistoric discovery of astronomical precession, rather than making the claim, as Santillana had, that all prehistoric cultures were aware of the phenomenon.</p>
<p class="indent">When he looked at the cult of Mithras for his 2004 article, &#x2018;On the Possible Discovery of Precessional Effects in Ancient Astronomy,&#x2019; Magli noted that, &#x2018;the history of modern Mithraic studies is very instructive and almost unbelievable.&#x2019; Overwhelmingly, Mithras is depicted as a young man, looking away from a bull while killing it with a sword. Under the bull, a scorpion strikes at its genitals. Depictions of a dog, serpent, crow, drinking vessel and a lion are extremely common. In the 1890s, a Belgian scholar by the name of Franz Cumont decided that Mithraism was an Iranian cult dedicated to a being known as Mithra. This is despite the almost complete lack of parallels between the two cults, including the presumably important bull sacrifice. To get around this, Cumont pulled the bull slaying from a separate Iranian myth involving Ahriman, in which Mithra is entirely absent.</p>
<p class="indent">It astounded Magli to note that the Cumont Doctrine persisted unchallenged up until 1970, even though the astronomical imagery in the Mithraic cult could not be more obvious if the god were depicted in a pointy hat with stars and crescent moons on it. The possibility of an astronomical interpretation was firmly quashed by the Belgian and remained a forbidden idea for more than seven decades.</p>
<p class="indent">Once the forbidden idea was readmitted, Mithraic studies grew in leaps and bounds. The mysteries of the cult were reflected in the star lore of the ancient night sky. The bull is Taurus, rising heliacally at the spring equinox in 2000 <small>BC</small>. The scorpion is Scorpio, rising in the same era at the autumnal equinox. The vessel is probably Aquarius. The celestial equator in 2000 <small>BC</small> crossed Taurus, Canis Major (a dog), Hydra (a serpent) and a scorpion. As for the lion, Leo was the summer solstice constellation at the same time. We thus have the tantalising possibility of a warrior god who is strong enough to fix and move the stars, a very compelling proposition for soldiers. Why lock in a date so long before the emerge of the cult? It was the end of the age in which Taurus rose in the east with the equinox sunrise. It was the death of the bull.</p>
<p class="indent">But whither the god himself? Mithras was probably not Orion as the asterism is seen from earth as being <i>under</i> Taurus, not above it as Mithras is in relation to his bull. In 1989, David Ulansey noticed that there is another asterism above Taurus, and that is Perseus. Perseus, depicted wearing a Phrygian cap. Just like Mithras.</p>
<a id="page_16"></a>
<p class="indent">Almost by definition, the archaeology of mystery cults suffers from a near-total absence of evidence. However it seems quite obvious that at least some aspects of star lore moved into and through this cult the way Bible stories moved in the upper reaches of the Sepik River.</p>
<p class="indent">Seventy five years may seem like a long time for an entire field of study to go off in the wrong direction, but it is actually only a few &#x2018;scholarly generations.&#x2019; Cumont&#x2019;s best students &#x2013; the ones who agree with him &#x2013; become professors. Those professors have students and then begin to die off. Suddenly we see the tentative emergence of new interpretations, blinking in the sunlight. It is then only a scant few years before a new canon comes roaring to life, sweeping away the old. Returning to Max Planck&#x2019;s quote at the top of the chapter, this is how the eternal conflict between fact and interpretation plays out, this is how science advances &#x2026; one funeral at a time.</p>
<p class="indent">Book the hearse.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>