<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Star.Ships</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_43"></a>
<p class="chapa">&#x00A0;</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td valign="top"><p class="chaptitle1"><b>III</b></p></td><td valign="top"><p class="chaptitle1q"><b>ET IN LAURASIA EGO</b></p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="indent" style="margin-top:2em;">The last 140 years of the Western occult revival owe a great deal to the academic field of mythology and the antiquarian field of folklore. Consider for a moment the impact of Charles Godfrey Leland&#x2019;s <i>Aradia: Gospel of the Witches</i>, Robert Graves&#x2019;s <i>The White Goddess</i> or any of the works of Joseph Campbell. For better or worse, these fields provide a psychological and ideological framework in which magicians locate the context, origins and meanings of particular practices.</p>
<p class="indent">Magicians should at least shoulder some of the blame for the falling away of this relationship over the last thirty years but, as we saw in a preceding chapter, most of it must land on the moribund shoulders of academia as it struggled through post-structuralism and out the other end. At the level of group discourse, occultism&#x2019;s response to mythology&#x2019;s period in the wilderness has been to ossify around older, long-abandoned mythological frameworks. The time has come to recalibrate the relationship.</p>
<a id="page_44"></a>
<p class="h3"><b>THE RETURN OF THE HOLLYWOOD EPIC</b></p>
<p class="indent">It is possible that the age of disjointed, milquetoast mythological interpretations has reached an inflection point. Long-abandoned as dubious preoccupations of Empires, the &#x2018;grand mythological narrative&#x2019; is returning, this time (hopefully) in a far less political form.</p>
<p class="indent">Enter <i>The Origins of the World&#x2019;s Mythologies</i>, written by Harvard Indologist E. J. Michael Witzel and described by Wendy Doniger &#x2013; she of the microscopes and telescopes &#x2013; as an &#x2018;astonishing book.&#x2019; And it is. Returning to Doniger&#x2019;s metaphor, Dr Witzel offers us one heck of a telescope. He has undertaken a comparative analysis of worldwide mythologies and mapped this comparison to archaeological and genetic data pertaining to the spread of humans out of Africa and around the globe. The results are hugely significant and, crucially, <i>provisional</i>. To his credit, Witzel admits that his very long book is only the first step toward an interdisciplinary approach to mythology, not the last. New data are guaranteed to appear that will move his proposed timelines, or suggest earlier connections between cultural groups, or place mankind in a specific part of the world at a previously-unknown date.</p>
<p class="indent">Witzel&#x2019;s theory is big, ambitious and new. Bold steps, taken with humility, are to be celebrated. They are the only way to break through the conservative incrementalism that has trapped academia in its death spiral down toward intellectual and monetary penury. They also say something profound about the origins of magic and the spirits. Occulture, like academic mythology, has a preference for looking <i>within</i> a system for connections &#x2013; such as those between Hathor and Isis &#x2013; rather than looking at the comparison between such systems. Here is Witzel describing his comparative approach:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">The next step in the comparison is the evaluation of the actual content of the texts. In comparative linguistics this would correspond to the studies going beyond single sentences to the investigation of texts, in other words, the structure (and interpretation) of the texts concerned. In mythology this would amount to the description of quasi-syntactical features, such as Propp&#x2019;s theory of the 30-odd constituents of Russian folk tales. However, comparisons of whole mythologies, corresponding in linguistics to that of, say, the Latin, Greek, Sanskrit, and beyond, the Egyptian, Sumerian and Nostratic languages and so on, are missing even now. In other words, we lack truly comparative and historical mythology, whose parallel in linguistics has existed since the early 19th century.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Given that languages contain whole cosmologies, Dr Witzel&#x2019;s comparative approach
<a id="page_45"></a>
to mythology shines a brand new light on the interrelation of the gods and spirits of the western tradition. And such a light banishes the shadows of some persistent errors in magical reasoning.</p>
<p class="indent">Two such errors &#x2013; actually both ends of the spectrum of the same error &#x2013; are an over-reliance on archaeology&#x2019;s limited ability to tell us things about the non-physical world; and conversely the complete dismissal of archaeological evidence in either the creation of or the failure to update a magical worldview. Witzel empowers comparative mythology, linguistics, genetics and archaeological evidence to work in concert, using insights from one field to plug holes in another, while favouring none.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">Independent local emergence of transcontinental and transoceanic motifs, and in the case of Laurasian mythology, of the complex Laurasian storyline, cannot be posited just because <i>current</i> archaeology does not yet indicate their existence. <i>Absence of evidence is not the evidence of absence</i>. Instead, the very existence of Laurasian myths in the Americas is proof of a pre-Mesolithic mythological tradition. The limitations of a purely archaeological model for the interpretation of the spiritual world of <i>any</i> early culture are conspicuous.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">This interdisciplinary approach results in a global mythological scheme that has a time depth western esotericism is simply not used to dealing with. Whilst technically beginning prior to mankind&#x2019;s departure from Africa, the scheme pivots on that first colonial expedition. And so it is there that we begin.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>THE PEOPLING OF THE EARTH</b></p>
<p class="indent">Mythology is crying out to be re-examined in the wake of what we now know about the peopling of the earth. When constructing grand narratives, insights derived from genetic research are our best defence against falling into the bad habits of either &#x2018;stacking&#x2019; cultures in order of preference &#x2013; the imperial error &#x2013; or lazily relying on psychological explanations for similarities across place and time, which lacks evidence and fails to account for non-random distribution.</p>
<p class="indent">Given that the cells in your arms and legs are genetically identical, it is reasonable to suggest humanity has not quite got its collective head around precisely what our DNA is for. This does not mean we have not found it useful in other areas of research, particularly in the tracing of ancient population movements.</p>
<p class="indent">One of the purposes of my visit to Oxford mentioned in the prologue was to speak with researchers involved in the &#x2018;out of Africa&#x2019; genetic study. What I needed reconciling was the very good genetic evidence that every human alive today is descended
<a id="page_46"></a>
from the one African mother living between 200,000 and 100,000 years ago with the abundance of archaeological evidence that falls outside these dates, such as firepits in Israel and the UK that are twice as old again, and so on.</p>
<p class="indent">There are two main ways of calibrating these data:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">1</span> If an earlier group of colonists left Africa and subsequently completely died out then, by definition, their existence would not show up in the blood of people still alive today as their genetic material has not been passed down. As a result, we also lack the DNA of the colonists to match against existing samples in the database, making it all but impossible to find the presumably-much-earlier Mitochondrial Eve in Africa.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">2</span> With each passing year, it is becoming more obvious that we were not the only hominid game in town. Just in the space of the last decade, Neanderthals have progressed from being stupid, violent, language-free apes to a species capable of artistic abstraction in ochre painting found in Spain, pan-Mediterranean sailors, and a larger chunk of our own family tree than most of us realise.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">The second point will take on increasing relevance as the book progresses, but for now it is important to realise that when we talk about how long a part of the world has been inhabited, we are really telling the story of our own bloodline, rather than the story of the place. In the coming decades, we may expect a continuous realignment of very early archaeological evidence with the migration of other hominids such as <i>Homo erectus</i> and the Denisovans, fleshing out the story of an Ice Age world of mysterious, sometimes competing, sometimes allying hominid species. As this book contends, just because we currently cannot &#x2013; or will not &#x2013; see it, the early human story is a lot longer and a lot more exciting than anybody expected. The whole situation calls to mind worldwide legends of mysterious companion races that we pushed to the margins of our habitats before losing sight of them completely. It is my contention that encounters with other hominids and/or their cultural remains may in some part be reflected in mythology. (The Oxford scientists would not be drawn on this hypothesis, obviously.)</p>
<p class="indent">Returning to the story of our bloodline, it appears our ancestors left Africa, turned right and hugged the coast all the way down through South Asia and into Australia. According to research by the Bradshaw Foundation, evidence of modern humans is found just across the mouth of the Red Sea from the Horn of Africa 90,000 to 85,000 years ago. By 75,000 years ago at the latest, modern humans had already made it right around the south coast of India and Sri Lanka to western Indonesia and up into what
<a id="page_47"></a>
is now modern day Japan. A few thousand years later, humans had made it into Australia and what is now western Oceania. This is a surprisingly rapid trip. Perhaps beach jogging was our first leisure activity?</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Based on studies of bottlenecks in the gene pool, those first migrants numbered very few, somewhere between 10,000 and 2,000 people. They would have brought with them an early African language and, crucially, a mythology. At present, there is no evidence of modern humans along the presumed coastal route of South Asia between Africa and the appearance of fully modern human remains in Australia by 50,000 <small>BCE</small>. Any such evidence is likely now under the ocean as a result of today&#x2019;s significantly higher sea levels. The Negritos (including the Malayan Semang, Philippino Negritos and the Andamanese) are suspected as being remnants of this first exodus. Whilst they all show genetic and linguistic intermixing with neighbouring groups, the Andamanese show the least intermixing. Dr Witzel considers this significant for his suggestions regarding the mythology of these explorers as there are large overlaps between Andamanese cosmology and that of indigenous African groups.</p>
<p class="indent">Secondary migrations subsequently occurred up into Eurasia and Europe from Southern and Southeast Asia at the end of an earlier ice age, between 52,000 and 45,000 <small>BCE</small>. Colonisation of the Americas first happened up the west coast of the Pacific and then back down its east coast into South America at the range of 30,000 &#x2013; 20,000 years ago. (Assuming there was no trans-oceanic migration, that is. I suspect there may have been.) Successive Amerindian migrations from central Eurasia happened much later.</p>
<p class="indent">It may seem counterintuitive at first but similarities between mythologies separated in both time and space &#x2013; such as the Andamanese and African pygmies &#x2013; are methodologically important in building a global scheme. Witzel again:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">Just as in the spread of languages, certain motifs that are seen in individual myths and in &#x2026; mythology in general have been preserved at distant, diverse ends of the world; frequently it is not the immediate neighbors that are most closely linked, whether in myth or in language &#x2026; [I]solated, &#x2018;bizzare&#x2019; features found in two distant areas usually are a sure hint at something old, an older, now lost structure, myth or mytheme.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Witzel describes the great civilisations of the ancient world as &#x2018;secondary centres of mythological innovation.&#x2019; Mythology did not originate in these centres but was dramatically transformed by them. Rather than starting in locations such as Egypt, the
<a id="page_48"></a>
Indus and Mesopotamia, places of interest to a western view of itself and more easily interrogated by archaeology, we should chart the footsteps of our ancestors and see what is to be found there.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>GONDWANA, LAURASIA AND PAN-GAEA</b></p>
<p class="indent">Witzel categorises the planet&#x2019;s mythologies into two macro-groups; examples of both still exist today; and one underlying group &#x2013; mankind&#x2019;s earliest mythology &#x2013; which is reconstructed from an examination of the overlaps between the two existent groups in much the same way as ancient languages are reconstructed. All three are discussed below.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">1</span> <small>GONDWANA MYTHOLOGY</small>: 65,000 years old. This is the cosmology our ancestors took with them when they left Africa. These are described as &#x2018;a forest of stories,&#x2019; which is a collection of discrete tales pertaining to the origin of individual creatures, how mankind first appeared, and taboos around tribal morality. Gondwana mythologies display little interest in the creation or destruction of the universe; indeed, probably the defining characteristic of a Gondwana mythology is that the creation/destruction story is absent and the universe has always existed and will always exist. Modern examples of Gondwana mythologies are found in Sub-Saharan Africa, Australia, New Guinea and parts of the western Pacific, all places of long-term isolation from other cultures and in the case of the latter two, where we very quickly arrived at on our out-of-Africa mission.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">2</span> <small>LAURASIAN MYTHOLOGY</small>: 40,000 years old. Sometime around this date, somewhere in Asia or Eurasia, mankind developed what Witzel calls &#x2018;our first novel.&#x2019; Laurasian mythologies begin with the creation of the world/universe and end with its destruction. In the intervening time we find the separation of heaven and earth, Creation existing through repeated epochs, the killing of a dragon or monster, a Golden Age and a Flood as punishment for mankind. Examples include Indo-Aryan mythology (and thus Sumerian, Babylonian and Vedic), Eurasian and European shamanism (and subsequently archaic Greek and Celtic), North Amerindian shamanism and North African belief (thus including Ancient Egypt).</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">3</span> <small>PAN-GAEAN MYTHOLOGY</small>: Between 150,000 and 65,000 years old. This is Witzel&#x2019;s reconstruction of mankind&#x2019;s first mythology, emerging some time in Africa after the appearance of modern humans. It contains a distant High God who may or may not have created the world but is uninvolved with it, a Trickster who teaches/creates mankind, a spirit world viewed as a well of souls and probably a giant snake whose movements across the earth create the landscape.</p>
<a id="page_49"></a>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">This is a noble and ambitious exercise in examining non-random distribution. Witzel explains his methodology:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">In actual procedure, when carrying out the Laurasian project, we have to start by stating obvious similarities between myths, sets of myths and whole mythologies. As a matter of principle and procedure, one needs two or three identical or similar items, best those distant from each other in space and time, to establish a common ancestral element. Comparisons of items found only in adjacent cultures are discouraged as they may be due to borrowing, but widely distant, remote mythologies (for example, those of Polynesia and ancient Israel, Scandinavia, or Greece or those of the Maya and Greeks) are especially useful. Pursuing these investigations, the Laurasian mythological model will gradually emerge and take shape.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">We shall unpack the scheme in reverse-chronological order, beginning with Laurasia, and then address some of its shortcomings.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>LAURASIAN MYTHOLOGY</b></p>
<p class="indent">The implication of mythic similarity points to a common pool of motifs that must have existed at a sufficient time depth to appear across such disparate corners of the world. Given that both Amerindian and Eurasian mythologies share the same Laurasian shape, this puts its appearance somewhere between 40,000 <small>BCE</small> and 20,000 <small>BCE</small>, &#x2018;somewhere in Asia.&#x2019; Pinpointing the best case for precisely where in Asia requires the use of data points that Dr Witzel studiously avoids, which we will come to in later chapters. As we examine the components of Laurasian mythology, the most obvious examples that occur to you will likely be Judeo-Christian ones. This is to be expected as the Western world&#x2019;s dominant mythology is currently a Near Eastern one. However, as we saw from the examination of the history of archaeology and folklore, this does not point to a Near Eastern origin for the Laurasian story. Cultural prominence should not be mistaken for a point of origin. The Near Eastern variant of Laurasian mythology emerged at the comparatively late date of 3,000 <small>BCE</small> and thus could not have influenced the rise of the same &#x2018;mythological novel&#x2019; we find in the Americas.</p>
<p class="indent">Laurasian mythology also exists in a variety of climates, putting paid to the idea that mythology exclusively arises as a product of human interaction with the local biosphere. (Though a coconut tree quickly becomes an oak tree as people move north, the tree remains.) Before examining the scheme in detail, I will mention that, working to Dr Witzel&#x2019;s timelines, G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe falls squarely into Laurasian time and space. This affords us an opportunity to analyse and counter-check its ritual function.</p>
<a id="page_50"></a>
<p class="h3"><b>The World Egg</b></p>
<p class="indent">This is more properly considered the primordial waters/chaos/non-being-emerging-into-an-egg/hill mytheme, but that makes for an awkward subheading. Examples of this mytheme are found in Ancient Egyptian, Maori and Pacific beliefs, as well as Indo-Aryan, Eurasian shamanic, Hindu and Greek cosmologies.</p>
<p class="indent">Typically it entails the universe emerging from primordial waters as an egg, with half forming the sky and half forming the ground. Variants include the First Mound found in Ancient Egypt. The egg component is still evident there, however, where the waters of Nun are described as having no surfaces or edges and are compared to an egg.</p>
<p class="indent">In many of its variants, the world is created from the breaking of the egg in some form, and thus overlaps with the creation of the universe from the corpse of a defeated giant/dragon/monster. Sometimes it is the universe emerging from the egg but the physical realm is built of monster parts. Ymir, Pangu and Purusha are examples of this.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>Father Heaven, Mother Earth, and their separation</b></p>
<p class="indent">The most obvious example of this mytheme is the Egyptian Geb and Nut &#x2013; where the genders are reversed for reasons discussed later in the book &#x2013; separated by their children, thus letting in light and air. An identical motif is found in New Zealand, across Polynesia, in Japan and Greece.</p>
<p class="indent">Variants include the Bible in which the Spirit of God &#x2018;moved upon the waters&#x2019; and subsequently created/let in Light. A close match is also found in the Popol Vuh.</p>
<p class="indent">Typically, it is the children of this paring who are responsible for the separation of their parents and this act ushers in the next phase in Creation as well as commonly &#x2018;timestamping&#x2019; the children to an era before the ascendant gods of that particular culture. As seen below.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>Descending generations of deities and epochs</b></p>
<p class="indent">In a Laurasian scheme, the gods involved in Creation are &#x2018;under-worshipped&#x2019; in their host cultures. Even worse, they are regularly depicted as monsters that need to be slain, such as the characterisation by the upstart Olympian gods of the Titans or some of the Hindu devas in Vedic and post-Vedic cosmology.</p>
<p class="indent">The classic example of this is the Sumerian depiction of Tiamat, her children and their confusing family tree of murder and intermarriage stretching over four generations. Most commonly we find associated with the story of killing the leader of the previous gods the notion that there are four specific ages, each increasingly degenerate. (We are now in the Kali Yuga, for instance.)</p>
<a id="page_51"></a>
<p class="indent">An exception to the degeneration of successive ages is found with the Pueblo and Mesoamericans, suggesting a change in the &#x2018;opinion&#x2019; of aeonics among Laurasian cultures from positive to negative sometime between 20,000 <small>BCE</small> &#x2013; when the Americas were presumably first colonised &#x2013; and 4,000 <small>BCE</small> &#x2013; when we first spy the aeonic model again in the archaeological record. A change in politics or climate, such as a worldwide flood, may have contributed to this. Witzel on the Maya system:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">The present (fifth) phase of the universe began when the dawn of the fifth sun appeared, after the previous Four Suns had failed. In these &#x2018;trial creations&#x2019; the gods had unsuccessfully tried to create the world, light and human beings. The Four Suns correspond, sometimes even in name, to the Four Ages or four generations of the Indian, Near Eastern and Greek mythologies. The Navajo name their eras with the same colors as the western Eurasians: the Greek gold, silver, bronze and iron ages become their gold, silver, red and black ages. The myth is also found in South America, with the Incas.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">The original &#x2018;positive&#x2019; view of Laurasian aeonics is discerned by the progressive improvement of &#x2018;world governance&#x2019; in most of its mythologies: the universe is in chaos, then it is run by monsters, then it is run by local cultural heroes (who nevertheless had dramatic or tragic lives), then it is run by humans. The notion of &#x2018;falling away&#x2019; from a perfect state is presumably a later addition and probably arose in conjunction with mythemes pertaining to royal bloodlines and a Golden Age; both highly effective forms of local political propaganda.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>The Trickster/Demiurge who brings civilisation</b></p>
<p class="indent">It has long been proposed that tricksters or demiurges represent &#x2018;leftover gods&#x2019; from a previous cultural regime. If there is any accuracy to Dr Witzel&#x2019;s tripartite scheme then this may be simultaneously true and false. There is good evidence that the &#x2018;civilising trickster&#x2019; is found in our earliest, Pan-Gaean level. Nevertheless, the insertion of a Demiurge into &#x2018;our first novel&#x2019; suggests this new way of describing reality, the shamanic/chieftain description, had to solve the problem of what to do with all these leftover creators and creatrixes &#x2013; the serpent, especially &#x2013; contained within the underlying Gondwana stories. It is my strong suspicion that our changing opinion of the serpent over the last few tens of thousands of years is down to such a &#x2018;demiurgification.&#x2019; Prometheus was a Titan, predating the Olympians, and the Serpent in Eden is a patently archaic mytheme. Look how it turned out for them.</p>
<a id="page_52"></a>
<p class="h3"><b>Killing the Dragon</b></p>
<p class="indent">One of the cornerstone mythemes of the Laurasian storyline is the killing of a dragon or other enormous monster by a culture hero. Often it parallels or interrelates with the &#x2018;World Egg&#x2019; mytheme in instances where the corpse of the dragon is used to construct the physical universe. Given that the dragon or giant snake is evidenced at much earlier levels than the emergence of Laurasian mythology, it is tempting to draw the conclusion that these stories represent the rewriting of cultural origins by a new power elite: the shaman, the chieftain, etc.</p>
<p class="indent">Examples of this mytheme include Marduk&#x2019;s destruction of Tiamat, a deity several generations older than himself; Leviathan, a more modern iteration of the same Near Eastern dragon story; and Indra&#x2019;s destruction of Vritra, &#x2018;firstborn of the serpents,&#x2019; which releases all the world&#x2019;s water. The flood/water motif more often than not accompanies the dragon mytheme. Egypt, Greece, Northern Europe, China, Polynesia and South America &#x2013; completing the Laurasian &#x2018;footprint&#x2019; &#x2013; all contain examples of this same story type.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>A Golden Age</b></p>
<p class="indent">The inevitable next chapter in a &#x2018;novel&#x2019; containing progressive aeons is a Golden Age where the gods lived with mankind, which is then followed by the withdrawal of the gods and the stewardship of the earth by half-human, half-divine beings. The majority of these mythemes are associated with the origins of noble or royal bloodlines and likely emerged during a time of social stratification. One does not need to look too hard for examples. Egypt, Sumeria, Vedic civilisation, China, Greece, Mesoamerica and South America. A lot of &#x2018;alternative history&#x2019; involves zeroing in on one example, the Book of Enoch for instance, taking it literally and then making ambitious claims about the extraterrestrial origin of specific modern families or cultural groups.</p>
<p class="indent">Technically, nothing prevents a researcher from following the hypothesis that this civilising event literally happened and was caused by physical beings. However, such an hypothesis must be bound by the same rules of evidence as any other. It also, by definition, must examine the <i>original</i> telling of the story of our <i>first</i> civilising period, rather than arbitrarily selecting much later ones. Given that the homeland of Laurasian mythology still eludes us, such hypotheses are currently very tenuous.</p>
<p class="indent">A stronger, &#x2018;placeholder&#x2019; hypothesis would be that this mytheme is a cultural memory of a moment of increased societal complexity involving the emergence of a new class of rulers taking their authority from the stories of an equally-new shamanic/priestly class, who may have been intermediaries for a new class of spirits or gods appearing some time around 40,000 years ago.</p>
<a id="page_53"></a>
<p class="h3"><b>The Flood</b></p>
<p class="indent">If Dr Witzel&#x2019;s timelines are even slightly accurate, then Laurasian cultures had a story of a worldwide flood, typically interpreted as divine punishment for man&#x2019;s hubris, for tens of thousands of years before experiencing a worldwide flood at the end of the last Ice Age. Witzel&#x2019;s suggestion that these two events are entirely unrelated will be challenged below and explored in much greater detail in subsequent chapters. Even if the suggestion is accurate, and worldwide flood stories predate the end of the Ice Age, then going through just such an event would have been seen by the cultures who experienced it as typologically familiar. Put another way, having a very old story about a worldwide flood does not preclude the subsequent experience of just such a flood from surviving in your stories.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>The Apocalypse</b></p>
<p class="indent">The Laurasian novel ends with one heck of a boss fight. In contrast to the &#x2018;eternalism&#x2019; more commonly found in Gondwana mythologies, Laurasian mythologies not only have a beginning but will also someday end with the catastrophic destruction of the world.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>GONDWANA MYTHOLOGY</b></p>
<p class="indent">Complex religion must have existed and been brought to Australia by 50,000 <small>BCE</small> at the very latest. The independent creation of Australian and African motifs can be excluded on the basis of the huge overlap between the two groups. The first Australian arrived with at least a few concepts they brought with them from home. Clearly some of the overlapping mythemes give us our starting point for constructing Gondwana mythology at this time depth.</p>
<p class="indent">What is important to remember is that Witzel&#x2019;s categorisation is not an evolutionary one. Gondwana stories are <i>older</i> than Laurasian ones but they still continue to this day in worldviews found in Sub-Saharan Africa, Australia and parts of Papua New Guinea, among other places. Cultures do not graduate from one collection of stories to another like cabin classes on an airplane.</p>
<p class="indent">From a magical perspective, the defining difference between Laurasia and Gondwana is that the former has a strong emphasis on the power of the word as opposed to the latter&#x2019;s stress on physical objects such as fetishes. This correlates to differing ontological emphases. Laurasian mythology seeks to explain the origin of a thing, as the knowledge of something&#x2019;s origin or name confers power over it. It is word and action that gives the Laurasian sorcerer his or her power. The role of a mediating object, such as a poppet, is less important. The prominence of power objects in Gondwanan magic
<a id="page_54"></a>
reflects the lack of distinction between the profane and the spiritual. All of human existence is integrated into myth. Quoting Maurice Leenhardt&#x2019;s description of the Melanesian approach to myth, Witzel writes, &#x2018;[t]he Melanesian projects himself into this world. He does not distinguish between reality and his own psychic life, between his self and the world. He plays a quasi-cosmic role.&#x2019; Less care is given to the wording of an enchantment than is given to the quality of the power object used.</p>
<p class="indent">Once again, it is tempting to see the emergence of a new political class in this change of magical emphasis. To shift cosmic power from control of sacred objects to the naming and describing of things shifts power from the magical-asset rich to the lexicographers.</p>
<p class="indent">The most common components of Gondwana&#x2019;s &#x2018;forest of stories,&#x2019; as opposed to Laurasia&#x2019;s &#x2018;novel&#x2019; include the following.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">1</span> <small>CONTINUOUS CREATION</small>. Gondwana mythologies contain numerous discrete stories of the origins of things, animals and most especially humans. However these most commonly take place on a canvas of a pre-existing, eternal universe. There is also no final destruction of the world. Gondwana&#x2019;s principal ontological concern is the shaping of the earth in such a way that makes human life possible. Typically this is seen in the activities of the trickster.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">2</span> <small>TOTEMIC ORIGINS OF MANKIND</small>. In most Gondwana mythologies, mankind has its origin in a tree. Variants include a tree stump or split bamboo. Less commonly this is a rock or clay. (Both motifs, and particularly the tree, continued into Laurasian mythology. They can be found in the Bible, the Eddas, etc. Continuity of &#x2018;tree burial&#x2019; is also seen in the Osiris myth.)</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">3</span> <small>A DISTANT HIGH GOD</small>. If some form of creation happened, it was instigated by a distant high god who has subsequently removed himself from heaven and is no longer worshipped, nor does he respond to worship.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">4</span> <small>FULLY DEVELOPED POLYTHEISM.</small> The deities that do receive worship are local, nature spirits as well as ancestors.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">5</span> <small>A CIVILISING TRICKSTER.</small> Occasionally the trickster is the same as the distant high god. More commonly it is his son or emissary who descends and teaches cultural technology to mankind. Often, mankind displays hubris and is punished by a flood.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">6</span> <small>THE (RAINBOW) SERPENT.</small> Sometimes the high god takes the form of a giant serpent and creates the earth by the movements of his body, such as in Melanesia. Other times the serpent is a separate being. The most famous example of this is the Australian Aboriginal Rainbow Serpent, a concept also found in Southern Africa, Iran, India, Burma and South America. In Arnhem Land, the Rainbow Serpent is the
<a id="page_55"></a>
supreme creatrix. She is represented as the Milky Way in the night sky and carries the ancestors of the Aborigines in her belly. However it is clearly stated that the sky and earth already existed.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">On that last point, it is interesting that the oldest archaeological evidence of ritual ever found on earth was discovered in Botswana by University of Oslo researchers. Offerings of arrow tips and similar objects, dedicated to a giant python whose body movements shaped the land have been found at a time depth of 70,000 years ago. This strikes me as something of a smoking gun for the Gondwana hypothesis.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>PAN-GAEAN MYTHOLOGY</b></p>
<p class="indent">Pan-Gaean mythology is Witzel&#x2019;s tentative reconstruction of what mankind&#x2019;s first cosmology may have been. Obviously there are no extant examples of these beliefs or languages. However the methodology is sound and the insights are useful in the potential repositioning of western magic. The reconstruction is less arbitrary than it might initially appear. Just as Laurasian mythologies retain a certain amount of Gondwana motifs, a similar overlapping approach can be used to posit Pan-Gaea.</p>
<p class="indent">Most widespread among the earliest cosmologies is the notion of a high god departing a pre-existing earth for the heavens. At some stage he (most often he rather than she) sends down a trickster emissary to teach culture and hunting to mankind. There is typically some story of humans violating a taboo and triggering punishment. A &#x2018;well of souls&#x2019; where humans come from and return to appears in evidence. I also suspect based on the Botswana research and the widespread appearance of the Rainbow Serpent that a large snake either was the high god or is in some way associated with him. Local spirits and the worship of stones and unusual features in the terrain that are occupied by said spirits also appear likely.</p>
<p class="indent">Sacrifice is prominent in hunter gatherer society and the necessity of killing is probably reflected in the destruction of the dragon/monster and the carving up of its corpse to create the world: without this act of violence there is nothing. Dr Witzel suggests that this belief may be the ultimate origin for the much later desire to build in stone. Regardless of their astronomical alignments, stone circles are in some sense a map of a world. To build one may well be a replaying of the carving up of a primordial monster. Given the prevalence of stone worship at a very early age, this is hugely intriguing.</p>
<a id="page_56"></a>
<p class="h3"><b>SHORTCOMINGS IN THE THESIS</b></p>
<p class="indent">Being the first to say something is very often more trouble than it is worth. To Dr Witzel&#x2019;s credit, he admits his thesis will certainly be subject to modification and elaboration as more information comes to light. For the purposes of our research there are some notable shortcomings.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">1</span> An underemphasis on star lore and navigation which are found in abundance in the Gondwana mythologies of Australia. The persistence of specific asterisms through history is one of the through lines of this book and broadly supports Witzel&#x2019;s thesis.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">2</span> Staying firmly within the canon of what are acceptable data in mainstream academia. For instance there is no mention of complex megalithic sites that fall outside the broad Gondwana/Laurasia grouping, such as Gunung Padang in Indonesia. A professional Indologist is expected to say &#x2018;we don&#x2019;t know where the Laurasian homeland is but it&#x2019;s in the Nostratic area&#x2019; without evidence.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">3</span> &#x2018;That&#x2019;s a story for another time&#x2019; is invoked when the evidence points in a direction that would make mainstream academia uncomfortable. An example would be the appearance of Gondwana motifs in South America much earlier than the dates currently accepted for the population of the continent. (These are motifs that could only have got there via trans-Pacific navigation.)</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">4</span> Witzel refers to flood myths as &#x2018;incidental&#x2019; and spread in a &#x2018;quasi-universal&#x2019; way, which is an academic way of sidestepping the very likely situation that <i>some</i> myths may encode <i>some</i> real events. This dismissal is glaring because detractors could similarly refer to the appearance of his own Laurasian &#x2018;story line&#x2019; as &#x2018;quasi-universal&#x2019; or &#x2018;incidental.&#x2019; We will examine in detail the distribution of flood motifs around the world. They appear with the highest density in areas that were subject to the greatest amount of land loss at the end of the Ice Age and the lowest density in areas that lost the least land. That non-random distribution requires explanation.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">5</span> Witzel won&#x2019;t be drawn on whether some of the flood myths may relate to an actual event but is happy to suggest that the concept of a primordial ocean surrounding the land is a likely cosmology to emerge as colonists left Africa and spent a few thousand years walking along the coast of South Asia into Australia. This isn&#x2019;t to suggest his hypothesis of the primordial ocean is not keenly observed. It is. Half the entire universe for our ancestral colonists would have been ocean; a source of food, wonder, and a direction from which they could be sure they would not be subject to predation, unlike the grasslands and thick jungle on the other side of the sand. Witzel appears to choose the motifs that may have at least some literal origin based on personal preference.</p>
<a id="page_57"></a>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">6</span> The perhaps understandable inability to interpret the simultaneous development of artistic and spiritual concepts at 40,000 <small>BCE</small> all around the world without recourse to a spirit model or even a consciousness one. Witzel&#x2019;s overlay of the mythological motifs of the world with the archaeological evidence of this great cultural flowering highlights its strangeness in a way that is hard to ignore. So we will not.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">7</span> The suggestion that Gondwana mythologies aren&#x2019;t interested in the creation of the world needs to be challenged in some scenarios. For instance, the Melanesian gods created the islands they settled rather than the whole universe. But the Melanesians did arrive there after the Flood. This means not only is the story literally true in some sense, it hints at the possibility that the act of Creation happened elsewhere. I suspect Laurasian mythology emerged in Island Southeast Asia, as we shall see, so the creation of the islands should be seen as a separate event to the creation of the universe. It is important to note that challenging this &#x2018;hard line&#x2019; does not invalidate the Laurasia/Gondwana grouping and could conceivably be used to locate the Gondwana &#x2018;origins&#x2019; for mankind&#x2019;s first concern with the beginnings of the universe.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">For all of these shortcomings I forgive him entirely. Firstly, because the theory is delivered with rigour and humility. Secondly, the broad strokes appear not only correct but hugely, hugely useful to the further investigations of the origins of western magic.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>SHAMANISM THROUGH TIME</b></p>
<p class="indent">As so many others have pointed out, shamanism, like linguistics (discussed in the next chapter), struggles under an historiographic challenge. The first region to be studied, Central Eurasia, has been used as the template by which others are measured. When working to timescales that cover tens of millennia and across the geography of the whole planet, this can be misleading.</p>
<p class="indent">Due in large part to the work of Mircea Eliade, we think of &#x2018;shamanism&#x2019; as originating or templating in the area of the world that gave us the term. While history has been kind to Eliade&#x2019;s analysis of Siberian shamanism, his work on African and Australian traditions has not held up quite so well, and is even racially problematic. He considered the Australian versions to be &#x2018;debased,&#x2019; for instance.</p>
<p class="indent">Based on the genetic and linguistic evidence that has subsequently come to light, we must reverse Eliade&#x2019;s directionality. Shamanism, in the academic sense, refers to indigenous spirit traditions tied to particular cultures and places. The overlapping beliefs and practices &#x2013; of which there are many &#x2013; moved out of Africa and into South Asia and Australia before human migration took them north into Eurasia. Thus we can see the retention of some Gondwana layers &#x2013; such as cave initiation and shamanic
<a id="page_58"></a>
dancing &#x2013; but also the development of some specifically Laurasian techniques that came later &#x2013; such as the use of drumming in association with the shamanic dancing.</p>
<p class="indent">Indeed, Witzel suggests that Laurasia&#x2019;s &#x2018;novelistic form&#x2019; may have been a shamanic performative device to encourage memory retention of a culture&#x2019;s &#x2018;forest of stories.&#x2019; A linear plot line is easier to recall and, crucially, retransmit with minimal change, than a non-linear one. The precision alignment of stone circles found right across the Laurasian footprint may represent underexamined evidence of this &#x2018;secret knowledge&#x2019; that accompanied the rise of these new, novelising shamans. The process of incorporating disparate Gondwana star lore into a coherent system that could be predicted, measured and controlled by a new social class at the same time that an identical process was happening to the &#x2018;forest of stories&#x2019; is too compelling to ignore.</p>
<p class="indent">Perhaps most interestingly, overlaying shamanic studies on a Laurasia/Gondwana framework provides insight into which magical techniques may be the longest lived. Extant shamanic traditions, such as those of the San, that occur in the parts of Africa that probably gave rise to the first modern humans, have techniques for moving &#x2018;heat&#x2019;/energy up the spine and out through the head. This flow is symbolised as a serpent, within a culture that also has a rainbow serpent that aids shamans with shamanic flight. The same motif recurs obviously in India and Australia. You will recall it is also evident in the statues found near G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe and in the uraeus headdress of the Pharaohs, among many other examples. Here we likely see a supremely ancient process of manipulating energy upward and out, then the subsequent journeying thanks to the assistance of an animal spirit such as a snake or a bird. By the time this practice reaches Siberia the snake has become the world tree (the combination of both echoes through Genesis and into Kabbalah) but the directionality is the same.</p>
<p class="indent">Examining these similarities in light of the archaeological evidence of mankind&#x2019;s earliest ritual being devoted to a giant snake should have us all looking at the contents of our grimoires and magical cosmologies in a new light.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>THE SPIRIT INTERPRETATION</b></p>
<p class="indent">This could almost belong as another shortcoming in the thesis were it not a near universal and entirely expected blind spot found across the modern academic spectrum. Witzel notes that the emergence of the Laurasian storyline broadly coincides with the so-called &#x2018;Palaeolithic Renaissance&#x2019; in both time and space. While it is tempting to completely conflate the two, the fact remains that the Renaissance also occurred in Gondwana cultures, particularly those of Northern and Eastern Australia, home to some of the most vivid and compelling cave art on the planet.</p>
<p class="indent">The simultaneous, dramatic changes in symbolic thinking in differing cultures and
<a id="page_59"></a>
local biospheres are difficult to reconcile in models that exclusively rely on materialist explanations. Dietary changes or environmental pressure cannot be posited as the Renaissance occurred across diverse climates. A specialist readership such as this one requires an additional interpretation, if not explanation.</p>
<p class="indent">Based on eminent mycologist Gast&#x00F3;n Guzm&#x00E1;n&#x2019;s analysis of the worldwide distribution of psilocybe mushrooms, it is interesting to note that their tropical and subtropical distribution overlays with South East Asia, New Guinea, Northern and Eastern Australia, New Zealand as well as Central America, the northern parts of South America and Central Europe. (The New Guinea/East Australia/New Zealand variants are very closely related to the Mexican ones, I note in passing.) Crucially for any attempt to fold entheogenic theory into the Pan-Gaea/Gondwana/Laurasia paradigm, the fungus is almost entirely absent from the parts of Africa believed to first give rise to modern humans but is found in high concentrations in the areas our colonising ancestors quickly moved to, in the case of South East Asia/New Guinea/Australia, and neatly overlays with examples of the Palaeolithic Renaissance, both in Gondwana and Laurasia cultures. Thus while the origin or &#x2018;reason&#x2019; for the first emergence of mankind&#x2019;s spiritual impulse, the African Pan-Gaea cosmology, continues to elude us, it may be that we are seeing here the evidence for an encounter with a new class of spirits or consciousness effects, triggered by the colonists&#x2019; encounters with the psilocybin molecule, resulting in similar spiritual and artistic responses within different cultures.</p>
<p class="indent">Given that we are talking about fungi and cultures with perishable artefacts at a time depth of 40,000 years, it is not clear what archaeological evidence we would ever expect to prove or disprove this hypothesis, although there are numerous depictions of mushrooms or humans with mushroom hands, etc. in later cave art, and indeed at G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe. It may be that mushroom encounter rates rose with the development of forest burn off as a strategy for growing the numbers of prey animals. This form of animal population management was still being practiced by the Australian Aborigines as late as last century. More animals, more dung, more mushrooms. (Certain geologists suggest that all grasslands are manmade. But for our purposes, there is no way to distinguish manmade burn offs from fires caused by lightning strikes.)</p>
<p class="indent">Western magic&#x2019;s &#x2018;immortality tech&#x2019; is almost entirely Laurasian: the use of words and ritual, the ascent or reascent into heaven, the mythological context of a prior age of wisdom teachers who have passed the techniques down to us, the tree of life and an eschatological milieu. While Laurasia may be the &#x2018;containing narrative&#x2019; for Western magic, many of its spirits are at least Gondwanan and potentially Pan-Gaean. You can even make the case &#x2013; and I do &#x2013; that &#x2018;true&#x2019; Western magic, devoid of its much, much later onboarding of Neoplatonism, is a practical application of a Pan-Gaean world-view:
<a id="page_60"></a>
God may exist but its existence is materially irrelevant; the Trickster/Devil is the gatekeeper and lord of culture; and it is recourse to local spirits and the dead by way of sacrifice that is the most commonly performed action.</p>
<p class="indent">The witch is a very old woman and she has been on a long, long walk.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>DIGGING IN THE WRONG PLACE</b></p>
<p class="indent">This book tells the story of at least one advanced culture that existed prior to the end of the Ice Age, and the survival of some of its cultural practices and spirits down into the practice of western magic in the twenty first century, albeit in dramatically different outerwear. So it is an &#x2018;alternate history&#x2019; book, which puts it in, shall we say, mixed company?</p>
<p class="indent">One of the great gifts of the Laurasian model is that it provides a countercheck of linguistic, genetic and archaeological evidence to some of the bolder claims of alternate history. It is worth highlighting some of these claims so you can see how wheat is separated from chaff.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">1</span> <i>Looking for Noah&#x2019;s Ark</i>. Noah is a recent example of a much older flood myth, inherited by Near Eastern cultures. Why then, would we expect to find a 3,000 year old boat on a hill when the original story is at least 10,000 years old? (The construction of ritual boats, on the other hand, is attested to all across the Laurasian footprint.)</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">2</span> <i>Plato&#x2019;s Atlantis</i>. A variant of the above error, with the addition of mistaking technological complexity for cultural complexity because that is what we value in the west. Atlantis is an example of a retained memory of earlier cultures, to be sure, and very possibly a retained memory of the first Laurasian culture.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">3</span> <i>The location of the Garden of Eden</i>. Eden is a Near Eastern variant of Laurasia&#x2019;s &#x2018;Golden Age&#x2019; motif. The tree, snake and immortality fruit make that pretty clear. Again we face the problem of using as a map the literal description of a tumbled down, 20,000 year old story that was first told a long way from Judea.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">4</span> <i>The Nephilim and the Book of Enoch</i>. Another example of a retelling of the much older Laurasian concept of the descent of spirit beings and an age of half-human, half-divine rulers and culture heroes. If it happened in any physical way, it happened tens of millennia prior to the story of Enoch.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">5</span> <i>Similarities between Mesoamerica and Egypt</i>. There are certainly many similarities between these two regions. Typically this is expressed as &#x2018;how could this be when they are separated by so much time and distance? Ergo aliens.&#x2019; The similarities are entirely predicted in the Laurasian model, whereby it was Laurasian cultures who colonised both areas between 30,000 and 10,000 years ago, and retained variants
<a id="page_61"></a>
of the same motifs. Dynastic Egypt and Mesoamerica (may have) had no contact, but wind the clock back far enough and the transmission vector becomes clear.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">6</span> <i>Literal interpretations of Moses</i>. These are typically accompanied by a confused description of the Amarna Period of Ancient Egypt, with Akhenaten inventing monotheism (sometimes because of aliens), and then something to do with swamps, chariots, king tides and a volcano. But Moses is a lawgiver type, along with Manu, Menes, etc and the &#x2018;baby in the reeds&#x2019; storyline is attested in Laurasian mythology as part of either the Culture Hero, Flood or Golden Age motifs. (It may actually be Gondwanan when you consider the Milky Way as the divine river/mother as found in Australia.) In any case, Akhenaten did not invent monotheism. He was not even a monotheist.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">7</span> <i>OOPARTs</i>. Out Of Place Artefacts, such as those collected by Klaus Dona and Michael Cremo. A lot of these actually fall within my scheme of significantly more complex cultures existing before the end of the Ice Age. Over the next few years, these OOPARTs may revert to being ARTs. Some of the artefacts, particularly those in the Americas, with dates of 150,000 &#x2013; 200,000 years or more can be interpreted as evidence of the complexity of other hominins, or evidence of earlier, ultimately unsuccessful, colonists, both of which are predicted in my thesis. (And some of them, frankly, may be evidence of full-blown extradimensional visitation more than a million years ago. Much of their evidence is hugely intriguing.)</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">8</span> <i>The Annunaki</i>. This topic will be dealt with at length later in the book but it is sufficient to say that, rather than aliens arriving in nuclear powered rocket ships to create mankind to mine gold to save the atmosphere of their home planet, a more satisfying interpretation is that the Sumerians had the most vivid example of the Golden Age/Era of Demi-Gods motif out of anywhere in the Laurasian footprint. Else you have to explain why these are dozens of similar motifs around the world that resemble an extraterrestrial event that &#x2018;really happened&#x2019; in one specific part of it.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">9</span> <i>Egyptians in America, Australia, etc</i>. Sure, why not? Nothing but an improved understanding of ancient maritime technology and the loosening bonds of academic timidity prevent the suggestion that trans-oceanic trade or exploration was undertaken by Dynastic Egypt. However the commencement of Dynastic Egypt is fairly well corroborated around 3,500 <small>BCE</small>, which is vastly too late to have caused a cultural transfer to or from the Americas/Australasia. (Ancient Egyptian culture extends much further back than Dynastic Egypt, of course.)</p>
<a id="page_62"></a>
<p class="h3"><b>DIGGING IN THE RIGHT PLACE?</b></p>
<p class="indent">From a magical perspective, one of Dr Witzel&#x2019;s more useful classifications is what he calls &#x2018;grandfather stories&#x2019; and &#x2018;grandmother stories.&#x2019; Grandfather stories are the &#x2018;official&#x2019; cosmologies that emerged with the rise of the Laurasian shaman/priestly class. It is the formation of the sanctioned belief system with its kingly stamp of approval. Grandmother stories are the survival of earlier, Gondwanan motifs in the form of folklore, fairy tales and children&#x2019;s bedtime stories. This is similar to Professor Tolkien&#x2019;s description of fairy tales as &#x2018;the furniture in the nursery&#x2019;: The furniture begins its life in the dining room or the bedroom, then it gets old and is replaced with something newer. The old furniture is relegated to the nursery, given to children to batter, and is ignored or forgotten by the &#x2018;official&#x2019; world of the adults. But it was once official, sanctioned, even prominent.</p>
<p class="indent">Witzel uses as an example of a grandmother tale the widely told children&#x2019;s story that babies are delivered by a stork. In Germany, the stork story begins with the bird picking the baby up from what is effectively a &#x2018;well of souls.&#x2019; This exact same motif in found in African Gondwana cultures and is likely Pan-Gaean in origin.</p>
<p class="indent">When looking for magical survivals through grandmother tales it is worth observing that folk magic or &#x2018;women&#x2019;s magic&#x2019; retains the emphasis on fetishes and physical objects over the emphasis on correct words as found in grandfather tales. The pivot of this book&#x2019;s content away from an examination of Palaeolithic star lore to an examination of the continuity of spirits and magical practices in the west emerged from a discussion with Jake Stratton-Kent, author of <i>Geosophia</i> and <i>The Testament of Cyprian the Mage</i>. Given the presumed female origins of goetia in Archaic Greece, and its emphasis on trafficking with the dead, then the &#x2018;grandmother tale&#x2019; interpretation posits the intriguing possibility that, far from reaching the end of the &#x2018;goetic hallway&#x2019; in Archaic Greece and being unable to go any further, we have instead found a doorway, opened it and spied a much, much longer corridor beyond. The practical implications of such a possibility are profound.</p>
<p class="indent">Somewhere in between Africa and South America, taking the long way around, mankind&#x2019;s spirituality transformed from a &#x2018;forest of stories&#x2019; to our &#x2018;first novel&#x2019; and the key components of the western magical tradition began. This happened at a time after the first colonisation of Australia and in a place necessarily north of it.</p>
<p class="indent">Perhaps not too far north?</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>