<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Star.Ships</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_219"></a>
<p class="chap" style="margin-left: 92px;"><i>All things fear Time, but Time fears the Pyramids</i>. Ibn Fadlallah al-&#x2018;Umari</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td valign="top"><p class="chaptitle1"><b>IX</b></p></td><td valign="top"><p class="chaptitle1q"><b>THE TREE OF MANY BRANCHES</b></p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="indent" style="margin-top:2em;">Moving into the historical period, several of the most important vectors of Classical Age thinking and practice, and how they relate to the western magical tradition, have been diligently presented. For such information, I commend to you the work of Jake Stratton-Kent, Owen Davies, Stephen Skinner, Peter Grey and Ronald Hutton.</p>
<p class="indent">The possibility of survivals through folklore, especially survivals dating back to the Palaeolithic, has been comparatively underexplored. Dr Witzel refers to such survivals as &#x2018;grandmother stories&#x2019; as opposed to &#x2018;grandfather stories&#x2019;; which would be the continuity of official narratives. One example he offers is the Cental European &#x2018;nursery story&#x2019; of the stork delivering a newborn baby from the &#x2018;lake of Heaven.&#x2019; He considers this a survival of the Gondwana motif of the &#x2018;well of souls,&#x2019; meaning it has been with us for up to 50,000 years.</p>
<a id="page_220"></a>
<p class="indent">Western magic veers between considering itself either a &#x2018;grandmother&#x2019; survival or a &#x2018;grandfather&#x2019; survival. Certainly, the continuity of the grimoire tradition owes more to Middle Class/grandfather influences, simply by virtue of the cost of printing and the spread of literacy. However, grandmother survivals &#x2013; almost by definition &#x2013; are less likely to appear in the historical record and thus suffer from an &#x2018;absence of evidence&#x2019; problem. Viewed in aggregate over the last two thousand years, it would be hard to argue against the suggestion that, by volume, the majority of magical survivals have been grandmother ones, from simple fortune-telling with roasting chestnuts to tying rags onto trees beside wells. Returning to Wendy Doniger&#x2019;s <i>The Implied Spider</i>:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">The chameleon quality of myth works in opposition to the more monolithic and dogmatic aspects of religion; where myth encourages a wide range of beliefs, dogma would narrow that range. Martin Buber made this point very well indeed: All positive religion rests on an enormous simplification of the manifold and wildly engulfing forces that invade us: it is the subduing of the fullness of existence. All myth, in contrast, is the expression of the fullness of existence, its image, its sign; it drinks incessantly from the gushing fountains of life. Hence, religion fights myth where it cannot absorb and incorporate it &#x2026; It is strange and wonderful to observe how in this battle religion ever again wins the apparent victory, myth ever again wins the real one.</p>
<p class="quotei">What Buber says about religion, I would limit to dogma. With that corrective, I think Buber&#x2019;s statement a marvellous testimony to myth&#x2019;s ability to keep open the doors of imagination within the most constricting dogmatic frameworks. It has been said that a language is a dialect with an army. I would say that dogma is a myth with an army.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Even with the measurability challenge inherent in &#x2018;grandmother stories,&#x2019; now that we are in the historical period we may discern a brilliant whorl of mutating motifs tumbling through time &#x2013; propelled by unseen motivations &#x2013; toward us. Much estimable and convincing work has been done in the past decade to demonstrate the continuity of western magic&#x2019;s form and function from the Late Classical World into Europe&#x2019;s grimoire tradition. In <i>Techniques of Solomonic Magic</i>, a book based on his PhD thesis on that very subject, Stephen Skinner observes:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">It is important to realise that the key nomina magia used in the [Greek Magical Papyri] like Sabaoth, IAO endure from the PGM right through to the 20th century grimoires. Although some of the primarily Egyptian <i>nomina magia</i> like Bainch&#x014D;&#x014D;&#x014D;ch
<a id="page_221"></a>
were dropped, the bulk of those taken from Jews in Alexandria survived. The methods such as threatening one spiritual creature with another, or using a phylactery or lamen or floor circle for protection also endured. Very few new methods were introduced although the exact wording of the conjurations changed over time.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Given the strong Egyptian influences on the admittedly-polyglot Greek Magical Papyri, it is interesting to me that we see the same &#x2018;bullying one spirit with another&#x2019; behaviour in the Pyramid Texts, right at the very beginning of Dynastic Egypt, thousands of years before the creation of the PGM. (And close enough in time to Neolithic shamanism to spy its actual origins on the plains of Africa and Eurasia.) Whether there was a continuous, mouth-to-ear continuity between the pyramid complexes of the Old Kingdom and the era of the PGM may well be irrelevant in just the same way the mouth-to-ear continuity of practice between the PGM and us is irrelevant. Skinner again:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">[I]n Europe &#x2026; unrelenting Christian persecution of magic has been in force for at least 1,650 years, and before that, selective Roman persecution (but mainly in cases where magic overlapped with treason). Although it is sometimes possible to identify some of the magicians who owned a specific magician&#x2019;s handbook, it is not often possible to identify the passage of techniques and training from one magician to another. The history of magic in Europe therefore has more often been one of rediscovery, each magician reassembling techniques from the books and manuscripts of previous practitioners, rather than direct oral tradition. Under these circumstances it is remarkable that there is such a degree of commonality.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Remarkable though the continuity of ritual is for the practising magician, there is also some continuity of characters. In <i>Geosophia</i>, Jake Stratton-Kent provides solid evidence for the survival of specific spirits into the grimoire tradition that go back as far as Classical times, to Archaic Greece and to points beyond. If we can pin certain spirits that still appear in our grimoires to Archaic Greece &#x2013; admittedly a long time ago &#x2013; then that brings them into alignment with the motifs and asterisms we have so far explored in this book, instantly adding a few dozen millennia to their true antiquity. For example, we know Astaroth derives from Astarte. And Astarte from Ishtar. And Ishtar from Inanna. Typically we stop there, but how old do you think Inanna is after reading the Eurasian chapter?</p>
<a id="page_222"></a>
<p class="h3"><b>EGYPT</b></p>
<p class="indent">Egypt&#x2019;s reputation as the home of magic is as old as the country itself. Even during the Dynastic Era &#x2013; and throughout the Greek and Roman periods &#x2013; Egypt was the undisputed originator and master of the magical arts. Historians of western magic typically begin their story with Alexandria. Whilst, as we have seen, it is definitely not the beginning of the story, Alexandria is certainly a crucial pivot point.</p>
<p class="h4"><b>The Rise and Fall of Alexandria</b></p>
<p class="indent">A young city by Egyptian standards, Alexandria was founded in 331 <small>BCE</small> by Alexander the Great. The dynasty he installed, the Ptolemies, filled the city&#x2019;s libraries with books from across the Classical world. Skinner notes that it was in Alexandria that the Old Testament was translated into Greek for the first time. What would come to be known of as the Corpus Hermeticum was composed there and then. Mid-twentieth century historian, Bruno H. Stricker believed the Hermetica got its start with an order from Ptolemy I to write down all the priestly wisdom of Egypt. The Greek Magical Papyri &#x2013; although the documents themselves are Theban &#x2013; typify the dizzying hybridity of Egyptian spirituality admixed with Jewish, Greek and Mesopotamian thought.</p>
<p class="indent">Over the centuries, this admixture has led scholars to declare wildly variant amounts of &#x2018;Egyptianness&#x2019; in the western magical tradition. Prior to the translation of hieroglyphics in the nineteenth century, &#x2018;Egyptianness&#x2019; was probably overemphasised. Today, it is likely to be underemphasised. As an example, the prominence of astrology in Alexandrian magic has been attributed to Greek and Near Eastern influence. Whilst this is probably the case for planetary astrology, I argue in the previous chapter that the decans and prominence of specific asterisms is not only Egyptian, but was present at the very beginning of Egypt. Much of the confusion lies in the fact that variants of the decans and asterisms are <i>also</i> found in the Near East. But this merely argues for an earlier date for their first usage; one old enough to have influenced both cultures before they coalesced once more at the mouth of the Nile thousands of years later.</p>
<p class="indent">When examining the western magical diaspora, it is important to realise that Alexandria fell several times and the final two times triggered major departures that would go on to combine and recombine over the next thousand years as magical ideas bounced around the Mediterranean like billiard balls. The first of these falls &#x2013; Roman Alexandria to the Christian Greeks &#x2013; in 415 <small>CE</small> saw an influx of hermetic ideas back into the Near East and most notably, to the city of Harran, only a few miles from G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe. Gary Lachman describes this vector in <i>The Quest for Hermes Trismegistus</i>:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">From its origins in Ptolemaic Alexandria to its rediscovery in Renaissance Florence,
<a id="page_223"></a>
the Corpus Hermeticum was secretly shuttled across medieval Egypt, Turkey, and the Middle East. Fleeing the ravages of religious intolerance and wars of conquest, it travelled from Alexandria to the mysterious city of Harran, where it became the prophetic book of a strange community of Hermeticists. From Harran it reached Baghdad, where, in the midst of Islam, it informed the mystical philosophy of the Sufis. And when Islamic fundamentalism came to power, it abandoned Baghdad to find a haven in a Constantinople that would itself soon fall to the Turk.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">We will return to Harran later in the chapter and attempt, like Shu separating Geb and Nuit, to split apart the grandmother and grandfather survivals found in the Near East.</p>
<p class="indent">The second significant diaspora happened following the fall of Christian Alexandria to Islam in 636 <small>CE</small>, triggering an exodus of Neoplatonists and magicians to Constantinople, under the patronage of Emperor Heraclitus, who sought to revive the glories of the Classical Age. According to Stephen Skinner, it is from Constantinople that the earliest grimoires, those with the clearest Egyptian antecedents, entered Europe, probably by way of Venice.</p>
<p class="h4"><b>Grandmother Egypt</b></p>
<p class="indent">Egypt&#x2019;s new masters had a more sophisticated relationship with the magic they inherited than is commonly believed. We see the influence of Alexandrian magic in the libraries of Moorish Spain, an under-examined vector of the Western magical tradition. (Oxford&#x2019;s first library owed much to the books of Moorish Spain, as does the entire troubadour/grail tradition.)</p>
<p class="indent">Whilst the practice of ritual magic &#x2013; the grandfather line &#x2013; was certainly frowned upon in Muslim Egypt, it seems pretty clear that a high volume of detail about the magic of Dynastic Egypt survived in a folkloric, grandmother capacity. From the beginning of the Arab period, there was a clear association between the pyramids and the stars. More specifically between Hermes Trismegistus, that apocryphal storehouse of Egyptian stellar wisdom; the pyramids; and the belief that they were in some sense &#x2018;stone wisdom texts&#x2019; from before the Flood. The Islamic invaders inherited Alexandria&#x2019;s &#x2018;astral folk religion&#x2019; which bled through into subsequent centuries. This indicates a grandmother transfer among the non-literate classes in Egypt at the time, as there are clear continuities from the Roman and Greek periods into the Arab period.</p>
<p class="indent">During the Roman era, Khufu was described as having written an alchemical work and that his pyramid was connected with alchemy. Zosimus (approx. 300 <small>CE</small>) writes that the alchemical process is also known as &#x2018;Osirification.&#x2019; <i>The Apocryphon of John</i>
<a id="page_224"></a>
retains the Egyptian idea that the decans influence different parts of the human body. The correspondence of the human form to specific asterisms is a clear continuity of the kind of immortality magic found in the Old Kingdom and is retained as the hermetic notion of the microcosm corresponding to the macrocosm. The association between one&#x2019;s fate and the stars, as well as the methods of overcoming it using explicitly astral magic, were regarded as Egyptian in origin and survived into the Arab era. We see a development of prayers to Jesus to remove the bonds of fate as a continuity of some of the PGM spells, such as those to Sarapis in <i>The Eighth Book of Moses</i>. Sarapis is entreated to wipe out an unlucky natal chart/astral fate and replace it with a beneficial one. The magician would ascend through various planetary planes &#x2013; those which inflict fate upon mankind &#x2013; to the realm of the fixed stars, the Old Kingdom home of &#x2018;true immortality.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="indent">By the 900s at the latest, the Arabic tradition considered alchemy to be &#x2018;the science of the temples&#x2019; (<i>&#x2018;ilm al-barabi</i>) and it was in the temples of Egypt that the secrets of this science, as inscribed by Hermes, were to be found. There were in fact at least three Hermes at this time. According to Zosimus, whose books made it into the famous <i>Kitab al-Fihrist</i>, the first lived before the Flood and he, along with the priests of Egypt, carved his wisdom on the walls of these temples using symbolic signs.</p>
<p class="indent">The Sabians, those of the Harran exodus, retain yet more explicit associations: Hermes built the pyramids of Egypt before the Flood as a way to transmit and keep safe the sacred mathematical, magical, medicinal and astronomical knowledge of the ancients. In some texts, the pyramids of Khufu and Khafre are the tombs of Hermes Trismegistus and Agathodaimon. Writing in the 13th century and relying on Sabian source material, Al-Halabi suggested that the pyramids were built by a pre-Adamic race of beings, probably making him the world&#x2019;s first Ancient Aliens theorist.</p>
<p class="indent">It is worth remembering that the ability to read hieroglyphs had been lost by the beginning of the Arab period. Jan Assmann makes an observation about the understanding of time in non-literate cultures that would apply to semi-literate ones also. There is &#x2018;historical time&#x2019; which is comprised of events in recent tribal or cultural memory. Before this there is &#x2018;mythological time&#x2019; which is a great storehouse of everything else that has happened, more likely arranged by event rather than sequentially. Thus, the Sabians did not retain a direct memory of the end of the Ice Age. However, there are aspects of their culture that were inherited from far earlier times, and the memory of that inheritance is signified by the presence of the Flood. It is a binary, before/after event in &#x2018;mythological time.&#x2019; Failing to recognise these differences has led academics to dismiss any possible transmission wholesale. It has also foundered many an Atlantologist&#x2019;s ship on the rocks of literalism.</p>
<a id="page_225"></a>
<p class="h4"><b>Egyptosophy</b></p>
<p class="indent">Prior to the decipherment of hieroglyphs by Champollion in 1822, Europe&#x2019;s understanding of Egypt was parsed through this mythic interpretation of its temples and mysteries. Erik Hornung, Emeritus Professor of Egyptology at the University of Basel, distinguishes this &#x2018;Egyptosophy&#x2019; from the later discipline of Egyptology.</p>
<p class="indent">Each era of European history has had its Egyptosophy. Marsilio Ficino&#x2019;s Platonic Academy in fifteenth century Florence saw Egypt through the eyes of the Classical hermeticists. His Egypt bears little relation to the Dynastic era. It was a place of high wisdom, above the petty squabbles of kings, popes and bankers. Hornung writes in <i>The Secret Lore of Egypt: Its Impact on the West</i>:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">The founder of this Hermetic religion, whom even Christianity and Islam venerated as a predecessor of their own prophets, became an integrating figure during the early modern period, a bearer of hope and patron of a body of knowledge independent of the Bible and the Quran. Even Copernicus could appeal to him in founding a new system &#x2026;</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">The Egypt of Ficino and Bruno electrified European intellectual life. As the Reformation and Counter Reformation unfolded, the notion of a peaceable, inclusive philosophy held greater and greater appeal. The Rosicrucians, ironically just before the Thirty Years&#x2019; War, anticipated the renewal of the world via the return of hermetic philosophy.</p>
<p class="indent">In later centuries, Egypt exemplified the perfect political model of the Enlightenment: just laws, peace and a cultural Renaissance. French Revolutionaries, Freemasons, everyone saw in an Egyptosophical Egypt a vision of their preferred world: either it was the template for how to live under a benign monarch or it was an example of what happens to the common man when all those dastardly kings and priests are allowed to run the show. That vision of cruelty to the Egyptian workforce at the hands of an evil priesthood &#x2013; which was used at the time as a metaphor for Catholicism &#x2013; survived into twentieth century Egyptology.</p>
<p class="indent">Catholicism itself vigorously adopted many hermetic trappings in an attempt to align with that &#x2018;purer, original&#x2019; source, as evidenced by the layout and iconography of many Renaissance churches, as well as the face-meltingly obvious hermetic sun temple design of St Peter&#x2019;s itself. With the return to England of Charles II and the foundation of the Royal Society, wizards to a man, people such as Christopher Wren were keen to use hermetic principles to rebuild London as a &#x2018;New Jerusalem.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="indent">There is something delightful in the infinite recursion of Egypt &#x2013; the source of hermetic symbolic magic for all these men &#x2013; being itself a symbol for each of their
<a id="page_226"></a>
perfect world. (Mirror of heaven indeed!) Just as we have the persistence of a ritual form throughout the grimoire period discovered anew, as Skinner notes, with each generation, we similarly have a persistence of <i>architecture as ritual</i> from Saqqara to Paris to London to Washington DC, discovered anew by each culture.</p>
<p class="indent">Delightful though the recursion is, Egyptosophy is not Egyptology and with the rise of scientific materialist &#x2018;Hunger Games academia&#x2019; in the twentieth century, the two are divided by a Nile of vitriol. Hornung regrets this:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">[I]t would be productive for both sides if there were more bridges and less reluctance between the scholarly disciplines and esoteric pursuits. We need think only of the psychological insights won by Carl Gustav Jung from his study of alchemy, and I regret only that he did not have better sources on ancient Egypt at his disposal. In esoteric circles, people are too dependent on the old, outdated works of Budge and ought to take into account more recent literature, which has much to offer of esoteric interest.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Dr Naydler would agree, and goes further:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">The interpretation of religion requires not simply a breadth of knowledge of the culture in which that religion flourished &#x2026; but also a feeling for, and a personal interest in, the nature of religious experience. Religion &#x2013; even a so-called dead religion (as ancient Egyptian religion may seem) &#x2013; is not so much another academic subject to be covered as a universe of human experience to be encountered, engaged with, and affected by &#x2026; [T]he deeper understanding arises only when the academic is prepared to allow him- or herself to be existentially challenged by the material that is being studied.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Dr Naydler is certainly correct in this observation. Sadly, that has not been the story of Egyptology&#x2019;s inexorable rise. From the mid-nineteenth century, peaking in the late twentieth century, Egyptology fell into alignment with the materialist, Darwinistic notions of &#x2018;progression&#x2019; from inferior states or cultures to superior ones. This has meant that most of the spiritual material has been translated by &#x2018;scholars&#x2019; who do not believe in the existence of the subject they are studying. It is as if primatologists refused to consider the possible existence of gorillas. Naydler describes the impact of Egyptology&#x2019;s handmaidening of materialism.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">The trajectory of history was seen as a steady ascent from the primitive childhood
<a id="page_227"></a>
of humanity, dominated by magic and superstition, to our present enlightened maturity, characterized by scientific rationalism &#x2026; Egyptology became handmaiden to a much bigger project &#x2013; that of materialistic science &#x2013; which was to explain both the outer and inner worlds in terms that excluded all reference to the spiritual as a real and operative dimension of existence.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">This denial of any form of indigenous mysticism in Egypt led to the pervasive academic belief that the culture was death-obsessed, a conclusion that is not mentioned even once by ancient writers such as Herodotus, who all praised her wisdom and mystic insight. Leaving the interpretation of Egyptian religion in the hands of scientific handmaidens who do not acknowledge the reality of the subject of their expertise is the principal cause for the persistence of the notion that the pyramids were pointy tombs. To their &#x2018;expert&#x2019; eyes, Egyptian cosmology was primitive and haphazard and the Egyptian mind was &#x2018;prephilosophical.&#x2019; Talk about glass houses!</p>
<p class="indent">Denying the Egyptians a form of mysticism led inexorably to the bizarre conclusion that the Egyptians were a practical, materialistic people, caring little for &#x2018;The Big Questions&#x2019; and with no understanding of or interest in any of the laws of forces which governed the universe. Honestly, the mind boggles.</p>
<p class="indent">Nevertheless, this was the milieu in which the Victorian magical revival occurred. On the one hand you had a persistent eighteenth century fantasism and London&#x2019;s &#x2018;mummy-mania.&#x2019; On the other you had materialist savages who were too stupid to invent the wheel. Coherence of opinion was in short supply.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>NEAR EAST</b></p>
<p class="indent">The mythology of the Near East is a western magical vector in urgent need of re-examination. Many of occultism&#x2019;s &#x2018;self-evident truths&#x2019; were formed at a time when the Hebrew Bible was believed to be an accurate source of history. This presents any number of challenges. We do not know the date of the original composition of most of its books, nor do we know its authors. There is no historical evidence for large kingdoms under David or Solomon, nor the presence of a large Jewish slave force in Egypt and its subsequent Exodus. Successive translations into Hebrew, Latin and English have obfuscated the hybridity of much of Jewish folklore. Ugaritic gods, myths and practices found their way into Hebrew cosmology, Yahweh appears to have had a wife (Asherah) and most of Judaism&#x2019;s plot points &#x2013; Creation, Eden, the Fall, Noah, the aforementioned &#x2018;Golden Age&#x2019; kingdoms &#x2013; have antecedents going as far back as Sumeria; an entirely expected outcome for a Laurasian belief system.</p>
<p class="indent">Of course, a satisfactory reexamination would not just take entire books, but entire
<a id="page_228"></a>
lifetimes to complete. A noble first step in this direction is Peter Grey&#x2019;s <i>Lucifer: Princeps</i>, which provides sufficient context for the magical practitioner to begin incorporating these insights into his or her work. Here we need only answer the following question and address its implications: if Sumerian mythology appears in biblical mythology, does Neolithic mythology appear in Sumerian?</p>
<p class="h4"><b>The Yezidis</b></p>
<p class="indent">We return to the Cult of the Angels which closed out the G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe chapter. You will recall that the bird/totem motif appears to originate in the Palaeolithic. We must be careful with what conclusions we draw from this. In Crowley&#x2019;s day, it was believed that the Yezidis were a Sumerian survival, and that their principal deity was the Devil himself in the form of a fallen angel. Both assertions have long been abandoned as erroneous. Survivals, in <i>The Lost World</i> sense of the term, are so rare as to be practically non-existent; continuities are a different matter. They may even turn out to be the norm rather than the exception.</p>
<p class="indent">Yezidism could almost form the template belief system for the Eurasian variant of the Laurasian cosmology. It now encompasses several sects showing greater or lesser Islamic influence over the centuries, but the term itself derives from the Kurdish and means &#x2018;the angelicans.&#x2019; In terms of the motifs we are now familiar with:</p>
<p class="space"/><p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> It has a distant creator god, followed by seven &#x2018;Ages&#x2019; or &#x2018;Emanations&#x2019; as part of the ongoing act of Creation.</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> The universe was built from either a pearl or an egg, out of which the Creator emerged.</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> Birds feature prominently, and in some variants the Creation Pearl was placed on the back of a bird for forty thousand years.</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> The universe is presided over by seven &#x2018;good&#x2019; angels and seven &#x2018;bad&#x2019; angels, demonstrating the influence of planetary cosmology. This number seven aligns with the seven ages of creation.</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> &#x2018;God&#x2019; is closer to a &#x2018;universal spirit&#x2019; and there is a belief in the transmigration of souls, rapid reincarnation and then &#x2013; at the end of the universe &#x2013; the &#x2018;complete&#x2019; humans rejoin this universal spirit.</p>
<p class="indent">It is Yezidism&#x2019;s propensity for absorption that makes it so worthy of study. One major festival, Jam, occurs at the same time of year as the ancient Eurasian feast of Mithr&#x00E2;k&#x00E2;n and appears to be contain continuous motifs from the earlier Mithraic festival. In <i>The Kurds</i> Mehrdad Izady writes:</p>
<a id="page_229"></a>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">Ancient Mithr&#x00E2;k&#x00E2;n celebrated the act of world creation by the sun god Mithras, who killing the bull of heaven, used its dismembered body to create the material world. On the occasion of the feast at L&#x00E2;lish, riding men pretend to capture a bull, with which they then circumambulate the L&#x00E2;lish shrine of Shams al-Din (the &#x2018;Sun of the Faith&#x2019;), before sacrificing the bull and distributing its flesh to the pilgrims.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">We are now in a position to pull some of these motifs further back in time than Mithraism. The bull of heaven&#x2019;s presence as well as the dismemberment of its corpse speaks to a much earlier layer, and would bring it into alignment &#x2013; back through Assyria, Babylon and Sumeria &#x2013; with the bull motifs and horns found at Nevali &#x00C7;ori.</p>
<p class="indent">Malak T&#x00E2;wus, the Peacock Angel himself, also contains much earlier motifs. It is Malak T&#x00E2;wus, or Lucifer, who creates the material world with the dismembered pieces of the original cosmic egg. Called Az&#x00E2;zil in some tellings, he is depicted as a sculpted bronze bird, often on a pole. We have already seen that the bird &#x2018;totem pole&#x2019; occurs at both Nevali &#x00C7;ori and G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe, but it is the peacock component that requires further analysis.</p>
<p class="indent">Firstly, the peacock is a South Asian bird. Secondly, the Dravidic components of Vedic mythology, as we saw in <a href="14_Chapter07.xhtml">chapter 7</a>, have Karttikeya descend from heaven riding a peacock, with the &#x2018;eyes&#x2019; in its plumage representing the Pleiades. In his form of Murugan, he &#x2018;precedes&#x2019; the other gods just as the constellation Pleiades precedes Orion, Taurus and the rest of the stars &#x2013; and just as Malak T&#x00E2;wus is the first of all seven angels &#x2013; the rest come after him.</p>
<p class="indent">Once again, we find ourselves in the same Pleiades/Taurus/Orion corner of the sky, sharing the same motifs. None of these are conscious survivals, but rather continuities stretching back significantly further than it appears on first glance. Yezidi cosmology is a storehouse for the &#x2018;blended spirit model&#x2019; of angels, Nephilim, etc. that tumble down from the plains of Eurasia &#x2013; moving gods and legends up down and around with each new worldview &#x2013; and also proof of concept that such a process can carry spirits and practices right through from the Palaeolithic, particularly in marginal, &#x2018;grand-motherly&#x2019; fashions.</p>
<p class="h4"><b>Return to the Star Temple</b></p>
<p class="indent">Combing through the Bible for muddled Kabbalistic insight will only yield so much magical utility. Treating the Apocrypha as some sort of &#x2018;suppressed&#x2019; or &#x2018;hidden&#x2019; wisdom &#x2013; standing opposed to the &#x2018;orthodox elite&#x2019; narrative &#x2013; will yield even less. Instead, what is needed is a realisation that certain groups will prioritise certain stories and motifs for localised, contemporaneous political reasons. To yield maximum
<a id="page_230"></a>
insight and utility, the mythology of the Near East must be viewed as an holistic spectrum. Adopting this approach makes it infinitely easier to see the bleed-through from earlier mythological layers and it is these layers that enable us to calibrate potential continuities.</p>
<p class="indent">We explored the possibility that the first emergence of large-scale agriculture in the Near East at or around G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe may have survived as a motif in the Cattle and Grain Text (as may have the practice of burying temples when they ceased to function magically/astronomically). It now appears almost certain that some of those Sumerian motifs survived into later Babylonian and then Hebrew mythology. Again, the notion of continuity rather than survival presents itself: by the time of Sumeria, G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe had been lost to memory for thousands of years. Nevertheless, if the site was the preeminent temple in the area where the local cultures first began to learn &#x2018;civilisational&#x2019; skills, then we might expect its impact to be discerned in cosmology: the stone has sunk to the bottom of the creek, but the ripples expand on the surface.</p>
<p class="indent">An examination of the many variants of the &#x2018;Shemhazai and Azazel&#x2019; story, best known from the <i>Book of Enoch</i>, is particularly useful. Shemhazai and Azazel are known variously as Watchers; Sons of God; angels; giants/Nephilim or the fathers of Nephilim, having produced them by laying with the daughters of man. This assigns them to that permanently liminal category of leftover gods, ancestors and &#x2018;other&#x2019; spirit beings, where we would expect to find them if they are vectors of earlier motifs. The common parts of the Shemhazai and Azazel story involve their descent from heaven, usually with God&#x2019;s permission or as a result of a bet with the Creator; their &#x2013; typically sexual &#x2013; interaction with mankind; some sort of instructional role; and then at least one of the two disobeys God&#x2019;s rules or directives to return to heaven.</p>
<p class="indent">The astronomical components of the best-known version are particularly compelling. Echoing Babylonian mythology, the generation after the Flood begins to go astray once again and God wonders aloud whether he should have ever created humans in the first place. Shemhazai and Azazel remind him that they were against the idea from the start. Demonstrating the emotional instability that Yahweh is famous for, after initially despairing of mankind, he suddenly leaps to our defence, saying that while they dwell on earth, they are subject to the &#x2018;Evil Inclination&#x2019; which would overpower even Shemhazai and Azazel. The &#x2018;Evil Inclination&#x2019; is likely inspired at least in part by the planetary astrological concept of Fate that can only be overcome by ascending <i>above</i> the planetary spheres; everything below these spheres is subject to its inevitable mechanics. (We see this inevitability blended with the decans by the time of the Greek Magical Papyri.) Shemhazai and Azazel descend to prove that they can still &#x2018;sanctify the Name&#x2019; of God whilst on earth and subject to the Evil Inclination.</p>
<a id="page_231"></a>
<p class="indent">Predictably, an angelic version of Spring Break unfolds, with the two angels laying with the daughters of man (and the sons of man, and the pets of man), feasting on flesh, drinking and spilling all the divine secrets of metallurgy, astrology, medicine and so on. Shemhazai and Azazel then decide to select brides; Azazel chooses Na&#x2019;amah of Tubal-Cain and Shemhazai chooses Istahar, &#x2018;the last of the virgins.&#x2019; Istahar &#x2013; very obviously a continuity of the Mesopotamian Ishtar &#x2013; refuses, and uses her refusal to trick the secret name of God out of Shemhazai. Isis acquires her magic using similar methods, which may speak to a much earlier origin for this motif (perhaps even Gondwanan, given it is a classic Trickster move). Using the power of the name, Istahar ascends into the sky and becomes its brightest star. When Shemhazai saw Istahar had outwitted him, he recognised it as God&#x2019;s rebuke for his sins, and hung himself upside down between heaven and earth.</p>
<p class="indent">In this telling, the &#x2018;brightest star in the sky&#x2019; is actually the planet Venus, which is what Istahar becomes. Again there is a parallel with Ishtar/Inanna here. However, as observed by Howard Schwartz in his excellent <i>Tree of Souls: The Mythology of Judaism</i>, &#x2018;later&#x2019; tellings have Istahar become the Pleiades. In both cases, Shemhazai is Orion. Once again we thus have the hunter pursuing his female prey across the sky. This may be a late Grecian influence, but it also may not be, given that the identical motif is found in Australia at a much earlier period.</p>
<p class="indent">There are additional elements to this collection of stories that suggest it may &#x2018;echo&#x2019; or &#x2018;encode&#x2019; the development of agriculture at or around G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe. In one version, at God&#x2019;s direction, one of the angels switched to a vegetarian diet while the other refused to give up feasting on flesh, which looks suspiciously like a mythological telling of the coming of agriculture (and its enforcement by the emerging tribal political class). There is also the fact that, most of the time, there are <i>two</i> angels, just as there are <i>two</i> of Dr Schmidt&#x2019;s &#x2018;heavenly beings&#x2019; formed by the T-pillars in the centre of an astrological temple on the hill. The hunting/Orion/flesh eating component remains, as does the prominence of that same Pleiades/Orion/Taurus/Sirius corner of the sky. And if Belmonte is correct that it was built to mark the appearance of Sirius as a &#x2018;companion star&#x2019; in the sky to the Hunter, then we also have the &#x2018;bride-seeking&#x2019; motif as well. Finally, G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe was the site of beer drinking, flesh eating and, it is reasonably surmised, intertribal wife trading, a practice which continues today during regular religious festivals at sites shared by hunter gatherer groups. When considering these alignments, recall that it would have been in the shadow of these heavenly beings that many of those tribes would have first learned about cultivating wild grasses, first for beer and then for bread, and subsequently taken this information with them.</p>
<a id="page_232"></a>
<p class="h4"><b>The Sabians and Harran</b></p>
<p class="indent">Of Harran, the fourth century historian, Libanius, writes:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">In Harran there was in the middle of the city a splendid temple considered by many to be equal of the Serapaeum in Alexandria. On this temple was a tower which was used as a military post and watchtower, since from its top one could overlook the entire plain of Harran. There were also powerful images in this temple. But when the praetorian prefect Cynegus ordered the pagan temples in Egypt and Syria to close, at which time most were destroyed, this temple in Harran was partially destroyed, and the idols which were in it also were taken away and in part destroyed.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">It seems vanishingly unlikely that the Alexandrian refugees that became the Sabians selected Harran because of its proximity to G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe. At this point in history, the site had been buried and forgotten for many thousands of years. Harran, like G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe before it, was a trading centre &#x2013; it even derives its name from the Akkadian for &#x2018;crossroads&#x2019; &#x2013; and, like most trading centres, presumably promised tolerance and access to new ideas from the east and the west. Nevertheless, this coincidence is so unlikely it demands some explanatory model, which may be forthcoming in the next chapter. But first, we need to coincide some more.</p>
<p class="indent">Mas&#x2019;udi, writing during his visit to Harran in 943 <small>CE</small>, gives us the only Muslim eyewitness account of the city itself. Writing in the <i>Muruj al-dhahab</i> (<i>Golden Meadows</i>) he describes the Harranian Sabians as follows:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">The Harranian Sabians have temples according to the names of the intellectual substances and the stars. To these temples belong: the temples of the first cause and of Intelligence, but I do not know whether it is the first or second Intelligence; also, the temple of world order, Necessity. The temple of the soul is round; of Saturn, hexagonal; of Jupiter, triangular; of Mars, long (rectangular): the Sun square; that of Venus, a triangle in a quadrangle; that of Mercury, a triangle inside an elongated quadrangle, and that of the Moon, octagonal. The Sabians have in them symbols and mysteries which they keep hidden.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Sabians are a group of people mentioned in the Koran as one of three &#x2018;Peoples of the Book,&#x2019; the other two being Jews and Christians. Under Islamic law, this meant their practices were permitted to exist in Muslim lands. It is quite clear that the Sabians of Harran are not the Sabians of the Quran. (There is no agreement on who the Quranic Sabians were, or if they even existed as a separate category. Broad consensus
<a id="page_233"></a>
appears to be they were likely some kind of Jewish splinter sect.) The Harranian magicians and hermeticists are called Sabians thanks to some frankly brilliant legal advice. When the Abbasid Caliph passed through Harran on his way to make war against the Byzantines, he accused the town of being pagan and demanded to know what religion its people practiced. Unsatisfied with the answer he received, &#x2018;we are Harranians&#x2019; he effectively told them to &#x2018;get religion&#x2019; by the time he came back through or he&#x2019;d put them to the sword. Luckily for Harran, the Byzantines put him to the sword outside Sardis and he never returned. However, in the interim, they had sought legal counsel from a Muslim jurist who suggested they declare themselves &#x2018;Sabians,&#x2019; who are protected under Islamic law. All they need do was present the &#x2018;book&#x2019; to which they belonged as its &#x2018;people,&#x2019; as well as their &#x2018;prophet.&#x2019; For their book, they chose the Hermetic texts, and for their prophets, they chose Agathodaimon and Hermes, adding that Hermes is also &#x2018;Idris,&#x2019; the Muslim name for Enoch.</p>
<p class="indent">It is important to realise that this cartoonish ploy did not fool the majority of Islamic scholars for a second, but nevertheless, the legal protection remained. Mas&#x2019;udi himself distinguishes several classes of Sabians in another of his texts, the <i>Kitab al-Tanbih</i>. Tamara M. Green describes them in her excellent <i>City of the Moon God</i>:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">1</span> The kings of Rum who were <i>al-hanifa</i> and <i>al-sabi&#x2019;un</i> before they became Christians.</p>
<p class="numa">The emperor Julian was secretly a Sabian, and when he renounced Christianity, he re-erected the statues which the Sabians put up as images of the highest substances and the celestial bodies, and punished those who did not return to the faith of the hanifs.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">2</span> The Egyptian Sabians, who honour Hermes and the Agathodaimon as their prophets; the remnants of these Sabians are the Harranians. &#x2018;They abstain from many foods that the Greek Sabians (i.e. those mentioned above) eat, such as pork, chicken, garlic, beans and other things of this type; they regard as their prophets Agathodaimon, Hermes, Homer, Aratus, Aryasis, Arani, the first and second of his name.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">3</span> The followers of Zaradrusht (Zoroaster), who formerly had embraced the creed of the hanifs.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Writing in the late 1200s, the medieval Arab geographer Al-Dimashqi exemplifies the arms-length handling of the Harranians. He distinguishes two types of Sabians: those who worship idols and those who recognise the &#x2018;cult of the celestial mansions.&#x2019; The Harranians fall into the latter category but he is under no illusions that these are the Sabians of the Quran, for they travel to the tombs of their prophets (the Giza
<a id="page_234"></a>
pyramids) on pilgrimage. Despite their lack of scriptural authority, he considered them a useful source of esoteric information for Islam.</p>
<p class="indent">This &#x2018;devil you know&#x2019; relationship persisted from the very beginning of the Islamic period. Umar II, Caliph of Alexandria, even moved the school of medicine to Harran in 717 <small>CE</small>. The Caliphate clearly did not approve of the Harranian methods, but recognised that they needed them &#x2013; like an early medieval MKULTRA, perhaps.</p>
<p class="indent">Harran is steeped in biblical motifs, specifically astrological ones. Although there is no evidence for their physical existence, Harran is believed to have been the home of Abraham, the first of the Three Patriarchs, whose brother was also named Haran. Rather than rejecting it as irrelevant to their astrotheology, the Harranians incorporated this association when it suited them. It formed part of their &#x2018;legal justification,&#x2019; for instance. But they also used Abraham&#x2019;s name antagonistically (and probably unwisely) in theological comparisons with Christianity and Islam. According to the tenth century scholar, al-Biruni, the Harranians claimed Abraham left the city because he was suffering leprosy on his foreskin, and that is why he circumcised himself. The etymology of Abraham is unclear and contentious. There is the obvious phonic similarity to &#x2018;Brahman&#x2019; which could suggest an earlier Eurasian layer. It appears to mean &#x2018;exalted,&#x2019; &#x2018;multitude&#x2019; or &#x2018;enlarging,&#x2019; which would be in keeping with God&#x2019;s covenant with Abraham. Interestingly, God specifically promises that the descendants of Abraham would be &#x2018;as numerous as the stars,&#x2019; another astrological motif layered into the local geography of Harran and G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe.</p>
<p class="indent">It is also worth remembering that Jacob had his ladder experience while travelling to the town of Harran, and in some versions of the Shemhazai/Azazel story, they descend to earth via Jacob&#x2019;s Ladder. Plus, as we have seen, Harran was once home to multiple &#x2018;towers&#x2019; with which one could &#x2018;ascend&#x2019; to specific stars. Also recall that most Islamic scholars found a workaround for their unease over the prominence of Hermes in Harran by declaring him Idris, that is Enoch, who also ascended to the stars.</p>
<p class="indent">As expected for a city that means &#x2018;crossroads,&#x2019; the continuities were not simply Graeco-Egyptian. Until the 11th century, the southeast gate of Harran&#x2019;s citadel was flanked by carvings of dogs, presumably for apotropaic reasons. This is likely a continuity of Nergal as &#x2018;My Lord with His Dogs.&#x2019; Assyrians would bury dogs under their threshold for similar apotropaic reasons. (The use of cynocephalic, or dog-headed saints, carved on the gates to or bridges into towns continued in Europe right into the Early Modern Period. The patron saint of travellers himself, St Christopher, was initially cynocephalic.)</p>
<p class="indent">Remarkably, there are also legends of &#x2018;The Head&#x2019; or head worship at Harran. When an earlier Abbasid Caliph, al-Ma&#x2019;mun, passed through Harran, he accused the Harranians
<a id="page_235"></a>
of being &#x2018;Adherents of the Head.&#x2019; This apparently refers to practices performed on the head of a man who resembled &#x2018;Utarid (Mercury). A contemporaneous Arab historian describes what he believed to be the ritual associated with this head cult: the man who resembled Mercury would be placed in a vat of oil and borax until his joints relaxed. Then his head was pulled, stretching his neck. This action was performed each time Mercury was &#x2018;at its height.&#x2019; This head would then prophesy in tongues. We may assume such activity continued posthumously as well, as the <i>Ghayat al-Hakim</i>, the <i>Picatrix</i>, contains several rituals associated with divination using severed heads, that bear a significant resemblance to these Harranian practices. The <i>Picatrix</i> even attributes one of these rituals to &#x2018;a philosopher known under the name of Brahma of Brahman, who died in India.&#x2019; There are certainly Hindu spells that require the use of a head, one even requires it to be set up in opposition to the dragon &#x2013; suggesting astrological components &#x2013; but then there is also simply Brahma/Abraham/Harran. Greene keenly observes that none of the accounts of &#x2018;head-omancy&#x2019; can be taken literally as, plainly, the Caliphate would not have allowed such practices to continue. She considers them either religious propaganda &#x2013; painting &#x2018;the savages&#x2019; as human sacrificers &#x2013; or symbolising some esoteric doctrine (or both).</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">[W]ithin the context of the esoteric traditions surrounding the Harranians, the tale of &#x2018;the Head&#x2019; may be merely a prosaic, if horrific, version of astrological or alchemical symbolism, reminiscent of the language found in Zosimus and other works on the esoteric sciences. It also has affinities with certain aspects of apotropaic magic which found its way into Hermeticism. Proclus, for example, reports that Julianus the theurgist placed on the demarcation line against the barbarians a human head made out of clay and consecrated by him; it was said to have the power of sending down lightning upon the enemy wherever they wished to cross the border of the Empire.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Having mentioned the <i>Picatrix</i>, it is important to recognise that, while Skinner is very likely correct in tracing the egress into Europe of the Greek Magical Papyri &#x2013; in the form of the <i>Hygromanteia</i> &#x2013; from Byzantium and by way of Venice, a significant volume of magical practices also found their way onto the Continent via Moorish Spain, even if their impact on Christian Europe was lesser or, at least, more muddled. And a large amount of this Egypto-stellar wisdom that came through the Arab line actually originated in (or at least passed through) Harran. During C&#x00F3;rdoba&#x2019;s height as the capital of Moorish Spain, it had over seventy libraries, some of which had over half a million books. At the same time, France&#x2019;s Royal Library had 900.</p>
<a id="page_236"></a>
<p class="indent">The &#x2018;measurability challenge&#x2019; presents itself once again examining this vector. I suspect the impact of Moorish Spain is underemphasised for linguistic and &#x2013; at least domestically in Spain &#x2013; prejudicial reasons. We trace the line of the grimoires and then subsequently hermetics through Italy because it is more easily measurable. However, what is important to realise about the figure of Hermes Trismegistus is that he became, particularly in Harran, a &#x2018;storehouse&#x2019; of philosophical/scientific observations of the universe as well as a plethora of &#x2018;low&#x2019; or &#x2018;folk&#x2019; magic practices &#x2013; grandmother survivals, if you will &#x2013; pertaining to medicine, drawing down the power of planets and stars, making amulets and charms and facilitating pacts with various astral intelligences. Greene says of him, &#x2018;Hermes Trismegistus was the source of all knowledge previously known only to the gods: the explicator of the stars, the sacred healer, the master alchemist.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="indent">Exploring what I suspect are more direct, localised magical continuities from the Arab line in the Iberian Peninsula does not invalidate the North Italian vector. As ever, we must resist singular explanations. Exiled to Brazil as a result of the Inquisition of Lisbon, Antonia Maria describes a folk magic custom that is suggestive of these continuities. She would sit in the doorway to a house and feed pieces of goat&#x2019;s milk cheese to Barabbas, Satanas and Lucifer as offerings (which were followed up by full meals cooked in their honour if/when her objective had been achieved). In Book 3, <a href="14_Chapter07.xhtml">Chapter 7</a> of the <i>Picatrix</i> &#x2013; which is described as explicitly Harranian magic in the original Arab version &#x2013; we find similar ritual activity: in an operation of Mars which requires the use of a young boy as seer, his mother sits in the doorway of the prayer house, holding a rooster, until called. The ritual is clearly derived from PGM-era Alexandria: while his mother is in the doorway, the boy is adorned with animal skins and has fire held under one foot and water held under the other. Eventually, the mother is called into the room and the priest beheads the rooster over the boy. As soon as the boy leaves the house, he puts on his index finger a ring bearing the image of an ape. Baboons were symbols of Thoth in Egypt and the rooster may simply be a domesticated continuity of a &#x2018;bird&#x2019; as symbolic of passage between the physical and spiritual realms, such as we have seen depicted going back to G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe and beyond.</p>
<p class="indent">Elsewhere in the <i>Picatrix</i>, there are repeated references to Hermes as the teacher of these arts, descriptions of him as the lord of the &#x2018;three flowers of things,&#x2019; as well as specific rules for building cities and structures aligned to the stars and the planets &#x2013; and warnings for those who build during inauspicious times: &#x2018;In founding a city, make use of fixed stars, and in building a house, make use of planets.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="indent">What are we to make of all this? There is, within a day&#x2019;s ride of G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe, a recursion and layering of most of its significant features or motifs. The stars, specifically
<a id="page_237"></a>
Orion and his surrounding corner of the sky; calendrical precision; the head, or lack of head, as depicted by the T-shaped pillars; the belief that the area is a conduit for Antediluvian wisdom; dogs and the dog star; the descent of the two angelic teachers via Jacob&#x2019;s Ladder &#x2013; also in the area; and a stellar covenant with the Creator in the form of the Abraham legend. All this at a crossroads, no less.</p>
<p class="indent">How do we account for the recurrence of these motifs over a span of ten thousand years, when &#x2018;mouth to ear to mouth&#x2019; transmissions patently did not occur? At the Inhabited Sky conference in Madrid in May of 2015, Jacques Vall&#x00E9;e made the following observation: &#x2018;In science, when there is a new phenomenon, you look for patterns that can cut across culture, geography, and so on &#x2026; The UFO phenomenon &#x2026; has constant features across time and space.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="indent">In the specific example of the area around G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe and Harran, as well as the Near East more generally, we do indeed see patterns cutting across time. That these patterns are commonly misinterpreted as either direct transmissions or simply not being there at all returns us to the core of the problem Dr Naydler described earlier in the chapter. Academia or materialistic inquiry is permanently ill-suited to examining something it thinks does not exist.</p>
<p class="indent">What is clearly needed is a methodology that can at least begin thinking in better directions. This would likely include some sort of unconscious resonance as well as John Keel&#x2019;s notion of &#x2018;window areas&#x2019;; that there are some places in the world more likely to be the scene of extreme paranormal events such as mass UFO sightings or the Mothman of Point Pleasant. This analysis works backwards as well as forwards. Why was G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe built on <i>this</i> hill rather than <i>that</i> hill? Obviously, we will never know for sure, but the subsequent twelve thousand years of history suggests there very likely was a reason, and given the persistence of explicit star lore in the region, we are justified in proposing some sort of contact event may have taken place at least once. Here is Jacques Vall&#x00E9;e again, this time in his classic <i>UFOs: The Psychic Solution</i>.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">Throughout history the minds of men have been manipulated by sources apparently external to their environment. It has been a common theme in all these communications that the purpose of the message was to show mankind a way to enlightenment, to greater happiness, and to salvation, either from physical disasters or from dangers waiting for us beyond death itself &#x2026; The historical importance of such communications has generally been trivial but occasionally it has been profound. It has often resulted in the creation of small groups of priests or initiates who claimed direct contact with the higher entities or gods.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<a id="page_238"></a>
<p class="h3"><b>THE BOY FROM LEAMINGTON SPA</b></p>
<p class="indent">There is always a risk when examining esoteric history that one marshals the past to support one&#x2019;s preferred worldview, which is certainly not my intention here. (In any case, I am not a Thelemite.) Aleister Crowley sometimes fell into this &#x2018;historical worldview&#x2019; trap and sometimes didn&#x2019;t. More interesting, from our perspective, are the results and insights he received that were a poor match for the understanding of history in his day but, in many respects, have been borne out by subsequent archaeological discovery.</p>
<p class="h4"><b>Aiwass</b></p>
<p class="indent">By necessity, we come at this story out of sequence. Crowley spent much of his life, subsequent to encountering the being in Cairo in 1904, trying to work out exactly what or what type of thing Aiwass actually was, in addition to being the author of <i>The Book of the Law</i> and his own Holy Guardian Angel.</p>
<p class="indent">At the time of his death, he had come to the conclusion that Aiwass was a type of extraterrestrial/extradimensional entity, one of a race of beings intimately involved with the instruction and teaching of mankind. To Crowley, he was &#x2018;a messenger from the forces ruling this earth at present.&#x2019; Kenneth Grant described Aiwass as &#x2018;a type of extra-terrestrial Intelligence such as we may expect to come into conscious contact with, as the aeon develops.&#x2019; Although it forms a surprisingly small component of Thelemic cosmology, Crowley makes it clear that Aiwass is far from alone &#x2018;up there.&#x2019; The universe is filled with extradimensional beings seeking contact with earth. Viewed in light of Dr Vall&#x00E9;e&#x2019;s previous comment, we read in <i>Magick Without Tears</i>:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">My observation of the Universe convinces me that there are beings of intelligence and power of a far higher quality than anything we can conceive of as human; that they are not necessarily based on the cerebral and nervous structures that we know; and that the one and only chance for mankind to advance as a whole is for individuals to make contact with such Beings.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Aiwass was more than that, though. To his credit, Crowley attempted to keep pace with the archaeological and scientific discoveries of his time. Although both hypotheses were subsequently shown to be inaccurate, in Crowley&#x2019;s day it was believed that the Yezidi were a direct survival of Sumerian spiritual practice &#x2013; the &#x2018;Devil&#x2019; in Yezidi belief being Sumeria&#x2019;s supreme deity &#x2013; and that Sumeria itself was the oldest complex culture on earth. Crowley came to associate Aiwass with this hypothetical Sumerian/Yezidi supreme deity.</p>
<a id="page_239"></a>
<p class="indent">Further confirmation for this belief arrived while Crowley was living in New York in the form of Samuel Aiwaz Jacobs, an Azerbaijani immigrant who shared his passion for Kabalistic &#x2018;word games.&#x2019; The middle name &#x2013; which Jacobs himself believed meant Satan &#x2013; was only the first synchronicity to pique Crowley&#x2019;s interest. Jacobs also provided a Hebrew spelling for Aiwass that gave the number 93 &#x2013; something that had eluded him.</p>
<p class="indent">A combination of Kabalistic &#x2018;confirmation,&#x2019; his personal magical experience and some imprecise historical information led Crowley to write in commentary to his <i>Book of the Law</i> that &#x2018;Aiwaz is not (as I had supposed) a mere formula, like many angelic names, but is the true most ancient name of the God of the Yezidis, and thus returns to the highest Antiquity. Our work is therefore historically authentic, the rediscovery of the Sumerian Tradition. (Sumer is in lower Mesopotamia, the earliest home of our race).&#x2019;</p>
<p class="indent">It is interesting to observe that while Crowley was wrong about the earliest home of our race and the origins of his particular cosmology in Sumeria, one can almost support his case for &#x2018;highest Antiquity,&#x2019; given the subsequent archaeological discoveries of the last fifty years and the emergence of the Laurasian hypothesis.</p>
<p class="h4"><b>Egypt</b></p>
<p class="indent">As already discussed, the Egyptology of Aleister Crowley&#x2019;s day is hugely inaccurate when compared to its modern iteration. This is to be expected as Crowley was born only a few decades after the discovery of the Rosetta Stone: interpreting the writings of the Ancient Egyptians was a new field. The understanding of the pyramids&#x2019; function was even worse, typically formed by solar-obsessive, Christian antiquarians who saw sun worship everywhere. An intellectual fudge that allowed them to paint historical peoples as primitive while simultaneously aligning their practices with a broadly Jude-ochristian arc.</p>
<p class="indent">I have been unable to find any evidence that Crowley had read the Pyramid Texts prior to receiving <i>The Book of the Law</i> in 1904 on his second visit to Egypt. In correspondence with Exeter University&#x2019;s Tobias Churton &#x2013; author of <i>Aleister Crowley: The Biography</i> and <i>The Beast In Berlin: Art, Sex, and Magick in the Weimar Republic</i> &#x2013; he writes that he is nevertheless confident that Crowley was familiar with them, given his long friendship with the Egyptologist (and Theosophist) Battiscombe Gunn. If he had read the Pyramid Texts prior to 1904, these would have been some of Gaston Maspero&#x2019;s sporadically published &#x2013; but well-translated &#x2013; articles. A complete version of the Pyramid Texts was only made available after the reception of <i>The Book of the Law</i>. This is significant because of the oft-commented-upon similarity between Crowley&#x2019;s
<a id="page_240"></a>
remarkable case of automatic writing and its similarity to the Pyramid Texts, as well as many of the spells of the New Kingdom&#x2019;s Books of the Dead. One spell in particular could almost be considered a concise version of <i>The Book of the Law</i>. That is Spell 177 &#x2013; which I&#x2019;ve given earlier on pages 116 and 117 &#x2013; widely regarded as and fairly obviously a clean continuity from the Pyramid Texts. Go back and re-read it.</p>
<p class="indent">There are a number of ways, all valid and useful, with which to interpret Crowley&#x2019;s reception of <i>The Book of the Law</i>. The first observation is that it clearly demonstrates Crowley&#x2019;s lifelong obsession with what we might uncharitably call the &#x2018;Victorian Tantric&#x2019; worldview. On this particular trip to Egypt, he had arrived after spending time in South Asia. (Including in what may have been part of Sundaland&#x2019;s sphere of influence, which may be synchronistically significant to this book&#x2019;s thesis. Similarly, recall also that Gerald Gardner spent much of his professional life in what was once Sundaland.) The universe as expressed in <i>The Book of the Law</i> displays mechanics that are far more &#x2018;sexual&#x2019; than those found in the Pyramid Texts.</p>
<p class="indent">The second observation, entirely expected in any case of automatic writing, the mind of the recipient heavily influences the subsequent text. Churton, in his biography of Crowley, sees parallels in his writing as well. Below is an excerpt from Crowley&#x2019;s play, <i>Tannh&#x00E4;user</i>.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote"><i>Isis am I, and from my life are fed</i></p>
<p class="quote"><i>All stars and suns, all moons that wax and wane</i>,</p>
<p class="quote"><i>Create and uncreate, living and dead</i>,</p>
<p class="quote"><i>The Mystery of Pain</i>.</p>
<p class="quote"><i>I am the Mother, I the silent Sea</i>,</p>
<p class="quote"><i>The Earth, its travail, its fertility</i>.</p>
<p class="quote"><i>Life, death, love, hatred, light, darkness</i>,</p>
<p class="quote"><i>Return to me &#x2013;</i></p>
<p class="quote"><i>To Me!</i></p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Churton observes, correctly to my mind, that this whole sequence is resonant of the words of Nuit he was to receive later in <i>The Book of the Law</i>. &#x2018;To Me!&#x2019; in particular. He writes that &#x2018;key elements of that revolutionary little book were already coalescing somewhere in Crowley&#x2019;s extraordinary mind.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="indent">Clearly there were certain aspects that Crowley brought with him to the rented apartment during those fateful days in Cairo. There is also the fact that the trinity of gods, although Egyptian, do not form a trinity at any time in Dynastic Egypt, which Crowley would have been aware of. That said, in <i>The Dark Lord</i>, Levenda remarks:</p>
<a id="page_241"></a>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">Egyptian religion went through many changes over the course of its roughly three thousand &#x2013; four thousand years of history. Gods and goddesses changed attributes over time, changed rulerships and characteristics, and even parentage &#x2026; Thus one could make the argument &#x2013; perhaps only slightly frivolously &#x2013; that the <i>Book of the Law</i> represents a new iteration of the Egyptian religion and continues the developmental process begun in the pre-Dynastic era.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">There was something about this experience that stayed with the master magician his entire life, and yet his diaries are filled with other multi-day, spirit-contact operations, ranging from New York to Paris, from the shores of Loch Ness to the deserts of North Africa. Singular explanations remain unsatisfactory in the case of <i>The Book of the Law</i>. Crowley brought his own mind to the experience but, at the same time, there were also some remarkable synchronicities of the type discussed in the previous section, as well as some as yet unexamined alignments with our emerging understanding of Laurasian or Palaeolithic spirituality. Let us consider the sequence of events.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>November 22nd, 1903</i>: Aleister and his new wife Rose, honeymooning in Egypt, secured private evening access to the King&#x2019;s Chamber. Crowley performed a modified version of the Headless Rite from the Greek Magical Papyri, discussed in the next section. The chamber filled with a &#x2018;brightness as of full moonlight.&#x2019; From Paris to Marseilles to Naples to Egypt, the honeymoon continued on to Ceylon.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>March 16th, 1904</i>: Crowley and Rose moved into a rented Cairo apartment, having arrived in Egypt &#x2013; their second visit &#x2013; in February. Crowley performs the same invocation in an attempt to have Rose see the sylphs again. She does not, but she becomes agitated, claiming she is hearing messages.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>March 17th, 1904</i>: Rose continues to hear messages for her husband, claiming they are &#x2018;all about the child&#x2019; or &#x2018;all about Osiris.&#x2019; Crowley wrote that Thoth was invoked &#x2018;with great success.&#x2019; An annular eclipse occurred in the sky. Churton writes of it: &#x2018;the eclipse was heightened by Venus, the morning star in Aquarius. It faded, reappeared, and caused a stunning ring of fire, bulging toward Venus&#x2019;s silvery glow.&#x2019; That evening, Rose claimed that their waiter was actually Horus, and that Crowley had offended him.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>March 18th, 1904</i>: Crowley, already suspecting he had offended Horus, magically &#x2018;cross-examined&#x2019; his wife. She passed the test and insisted her husband invoke Horus in &#x2018;a new way.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="indent"><i>March 19th &#x2013; 21st, 1904</i>: Exact dates differ, but over this weekend and into the Monday, Crowley invoked Horus unsuccessfully, then successfully, and also took his wife to the Cairo Museum as part of her ongoing testing to she if she recognised any images of Horus. Here, famously, Rose pointed out what Crowley came to call
<a id="page_242"></a>
the Stele of Revealing, which carried the catalogue number 666. The stele depicted a leopard-skin-adorned priest, Ankh f-n Khonsu, bowing before an enthroned, falcon-headed Horus, with a winged sundisk above the scene, topped with the arching body of Nuit. Crowley, astounded, insisted on a translation.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>March 22nd &#x2013; April 7th, 1904</i>: The diary entries between the museum incident and the subsequent reception of <i>The Book of the Law</i> have some holes in them. (Not uncommon for a man with an appetite for clandestine homosexual behaviour and an interest in younger Arab men.) Crowley appears to have done nothing on March 22nd, and then, before receiving its translation, begun interpreting the stela from the 23rd with an invocation of Thoth. From an historical authenticity perspective, his interpretation was poor. Crowley saw the ritual described as one &#x2018;of sex.&#x2019; He linked Nuit with Sagittarius because her arching body looked like a bow. Because the Sagittarian bow/arrow is associated with genitals, this allowed him to layer on the same &#x2018;Victorian tantric&#x2019; interpretation he slapped over everything. Using tarot cards, he identified the priest Ankh f-n Khonsu with Mercury and Aries; and &#x2018;Mars in the house of Venus exciting the jealousy of Saturn or Vulcan.&#x2019; Saturn, as the tarot trump &#x2018;The Universe&#x2019; was associated with Nuit. What is interesting about this frantic, terrible interpretation is that Crowley knew better. He was a proud Cambridge Classics dropout and a lifelong student of history. When he got like this, when he caught &#x2013; shall we say &#x2013; &#x2018;acute correspondomania,&#x2019; it indicates someone attempting to unpack an extreme synchronicity before the term had been coined. Indeed, in his biography of the man, Churton writes, &#x2018;Crowley&#x2019;s assertion that it was the stela&#x2019;s discovery that led to the ritual which led to <i>The Book of the Law</i>&#x2019;s dictation suggests the important factor was the stela&#x2019;s <i>discovery</i>, not necessarily its <i>translation</i>.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="indent">Whilst he would go on to construct a ritual that facilitated contact with Aiwass over the 8th, 9th and 10th of April, it was the encounter with the extremely unlikely &#x2013; with High Strangeness &#x2013; that he considered the cornerstone of the experience. Here was the universe noticing him. Here was Contact.</p>
<p class="h4"><b>The Headless Rite</b></p>
<p class="indent">Described by Jake Stratton-Kent as &#x2018;the single most important ritual in modern magic&#x2019; is an invocation from the Greek Magical Papyri known as The Headless Rite. Emerging from the Alexandrian chaos that birthed the Western grimoire tradition, <i>The Stele of Jeu the Hieroglyphist</i> is one of the more concise and potent invocations found in the entire collection. Crowley did not know it as the Headless Rite. Crowley, or someone in his circle, poorly renamed the ritual. Stratton-Kent describes this unfortunate transliteration in his <i>The Headless One</i>:</p>
<a id="page_243"></a>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">Either Mathers or Crowley set a fashion for interpreting the phrase &#x2018;headless one&#x2019; &#x2013; which recurs throughout the original &#x2013; as meaning &#x2018;without beginning&#x2019; and accordingly altered the phrasing to &#x2018;Bornless One.&#x2019; [&#x2026;]</p>
<p class="quotei">Sometime between [the publication of the ritual in English and 1904], some person or persons unknown adapted the ritual and altered the name &#x2018;headless&#x2019; to &#x2018;bornless,&#x2019; on the assumption that since &#x2018;Resh&#x2019; in Hebrew means &#x2018;head or beginning&#x2019; then the term &#x2018;headless&#x2019; might be read as &#x2018;thou who art without beginning &#x2013; unborn and undying.&#x2019; In other words, the &#x2018;translation&#x2019; relies on Hebrew etymology, which of course need not necessarily connect with a Greco-Egyptian ritual.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Despite the freewheeling approach to the translation, Crowley understood it had definite Osirian notes. The operant describes him or herself as the &#x2018;angel of Paphro Osonnophris&#x2019; or &#x2018;pharaoh Osiris.&#x2019; He used variants of it regularly throughout his life. The two most important times were on these two visits to Egypt. Of the second visit, in which Crowley attempted to use it to create werelights for his wife again and instead ended up with <i>The Book of the Law</i>, Stratton-Kent writes:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">This is perhaps an indicator of the limitations of the will of the magician, who, producing a ritual for specific purpose, on synthetic lines, overlooks the possibility that what he is adapting has a life of its own. This ritual certainly produced a significant result, but this did not remotely resemble the result intended. This is a point I wish the reader to bear carefully in mind &#x2026;</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Given Crowley&#x2019;s awareness that it was an incident of High Strangeness rather than his self-proclaimed mastery that was of most significance, it is worth considering the events in that same light, with a renewed understanding of historical veracity.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> <i>Headlessness:</i> Even with the name change, Crowley was performing a ritual with a distinctly Laurasian motif, possibly even Gondwanan. Consider the T-shaped, &#x2018;headless&#x2019; pillars uncovered at G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe, a hunters&#x2019; temple pointing at Orion and Sirius that involves &#x2018;heavenly beings&#x2019; descending to earth. G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe lay undiscovered until almost fifty years after Crowley&#x2019;s death.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> <i>Osiris/Orion:</i> Continuing the &#x2018;headless&#x2019; and &#x2018;hunting&#x2019; theme, Crowley performed an invocation to Osiris inside a stone map of Osiris (the Great Pyramid), that contains the same &#x2018;up to the sky and back&#x2019; journey found in the Pyramid Texts; another Laurasian motif, perhaps <i>the</i> Laurasian motif. Crowley was unaware of Giza&#x2019;s Orion
<a id="page_244"></a>
Correlation, as well as the headless hunter motif associated with Orion in some of the oldest cultures on earth.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> <i>Venus and the eclipse:</i> Crowley began performing the &#x2018;Bornless/Headless Rite&#x2019; the day before and the day of some visually impressive space weather. Atmospheric and stellar events are regularly associated with UFO contact experiences. He would go on to have just such an experience. Possibly related is the continuance of the headless motif into Christianity with St John the Baptist, who, as Venus, &#x2018;precedes&#x2019; the dawn that is Christ. He is headless.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> <i>Aiwass:</i> The being that appeared as a result of this &#x2018;accidental reactivation of the spaceship&#x2019; came to be associated in Crowley&#x2019;s mind with the god of the Yezidis, dating back to Sumeria. Whilst it does not date back to Sumeria, the central god of the Yezidis probably came from a Neolithic buzzard cult that is a likely continuance of the &#x2018;bird on a stick&#x2019; stone objects found at places such as G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe and nearby &#x00C7;atalh&#x00F6;y&#x00FC;k. Both sites demonstrate some of the earliest motifs subsequently to turn up in Old Kingdom Egypt. Crowley would eventually consider this evidently-very-ancient-being &#x2018;from high antiquity&#x2019; to be some form of extraterrestial intelligence involved with the teaching of mankind.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> <i>The Stele of Revealing:</i> The 25th Dynasty stela pointed out by Rose is neither old nor important by Egyptian standards. Examined under this new light, however, a few things emerge. Firstly, Ankh f-n Khonsu is dressed in a leopard skin, reminiscent of the earliest Heb Sed ritual garb (itself a nod back to its shamanic origins). Secondly, the stela itself is atypical in its inscriptions: it blends Ra-Horakhty (Horus of the Horizon) with Sokar-Osiris; Sokar being the earliest known god of the Giza plateau and an early form of Osiris, and the Giza plateau being where Crowley performed his Osiris ritual, of course, in a stellar-aligned structure &#x2018;activated&#x2019; by Horus of the Horizon. Finally, it is rare for its reverse side containing two spells from the New Kingdom Book of the Dead &#x2013; a very old set of spells by the 25th Dynasty. They allow the spirit of the deceased to return to the earth at will.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> <i>Nuit:</i> Despite his inevitably &#x2018;Victorian Tantric&#x2019; interpretation of it, the fact remains that the principal deity speaking through Crowley&#x2019;s automatic writing encounter was not only a personification of the stars themselves but itself the esoteric version of the crucial piece of the Laurasian Creation story, that is, the separation of heaven and earth. As a female sky, Nuit is &#x2018;under the earth,&#x2019; that is, in the Underworld; the
<a id="page_245"></a>
stars being the spirits and achieving a place among them &#x2013; back home &#x2013; being our ultimate goal. For tens of thousands of years we have built stellar temples &#x2018;for the chance of union&#x2019; with the stars.</p>
<p class="h4"><b>Vectors</b></p>
<p class="indent">Aleister Crowley retains his importance for much of western occultism, but his wider significance needs to be considered alongside such events as the Miracle at Fatima, Andrija Puharich&#x2019;s famous s&#x00E9;ance in a Maine farmhouse where he contacted the Nine, the Betty and Barney Hill incident and other paranormal events that have outsized cultural impact. Indeed, outsized cultural impact could even be marshalled to support claims of veracity for these events without saying anything about their actual content or implications. In <i>UFOs: The Psychic Solution</i>, Jacques Vall&#x00E9;e writes:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">We have encountered a multi-faceted phenomenon and we are trying very hard to ignore it, because it does not fit into any neat categories and refuses to be dragged under a microscope to be examined. Instead, it appears to seek confrontation with us on its own terms.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Crowley&#x2019;s outsized cultural impact covers novels, music, comics, secret military programmes such as the Stargate Project and the development of the modern space programme itself. His enigmatic experiences and their impressive influence over the twentieth century point toward the underlying reality of phenomena that have played a part, for whatever reason, in the cultural, spiritual and technological development of mankind. These phenomena have persisted throughout the human journey, they have always been ambivalent, their ultimate motivations opaque and they continue to persist to the present day.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>