<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Star.Ships</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_246"></a>
<p class="chapa" style="margin-left: 92px;"><i>Astronomers seem terrified of actually finding something important</i>.<br/>Jacques Vall&#x00E9;e, <i>Fastwalker</i></p>
<table>
<tr>
<td valign="top"><p class="chaptitle1"><b>X</b></p></td><td valign="top"><p class="chaptitle1q"><b>CHILDREN OF THE MOTHER OF HEAVEN</b></p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="indent" style="margin-top:2em;">Observations are not explanations. It is self-evident that we need a bigger paradigm. In the west, history gave us a monotheism that either denied or ignored the long-lived human experience of spirit encounters. It was this monotheism that gave birth to a materialistic vision of the universe that itself denies the existence of anything nonphysical, reaching the apogee of absurdity with its fiat &#x2018;solve&#x2019; for &#x2018;the hard problem of consciousness&#x2019;: no such thing exists! From an interpretive standpoint, this leaves western discourse with not very much room to manoeuvre. Publicly, we have what amounts to two equally unsatisfying vectors of enquiry. Firstly, there are the researchers working within the academic mainstream who are unlikely to find something they do not believe exists. Secondly, there are those working outside the academic mainstream who are fixated on finding something they believe exists &#x2013; evidence for physical extraterrestrial intervention &#x2013; but probably doesn&#x2019;t. Or, at least, not in the way it is commonly presented.</p>
<a id="page_247"></a>
<p class="indent">The main shortcoming of the extraterrestrial hypothesis is that it remains hamstrung by materialism and undervalues the impact of consciousness and psi effects, which have been scientifically observed for over a century. Its narrative still revolves around physical aliens appearing in physical space ships that subsequently trigger a swathe of cargo cults among physical savages here on earth. The principle of parsimony suggests we should at least begin with a psi or consciousness interpretation, but this isn&#x2019;t to say that both possibilities were not in play at least once in human history. Indeed, none other than Carl Sagan went so far as to estimate the number of times extraterrestrials have visited earth in the human era. He speculated that if some sort of &#x2018;Galactic survey ship&#x2019; had noticed the appearance of Proconsul, a human ancestor, some 25 million years ago, then the rate of sampling or monitoring may have increased from that time, &#x2018;perhaps to once every ten thousand years.&#x2019; Sagan suggested that that contact would have increased even more since the beginning of the post-glacial era as mankind increased in cultural and technological complexity and that if the intervening time between contacts has been reduced down to a few thousand years then &#x2018;there is a possibility that contact with an extraterrestrial civilization occurred within historical times.&#x2019; Sagan&#x2019;s &#x2018;possibility&#x2019; is, to my mind, highly likely. That still leaves us with big question marks hanging over whether such encounters had any impact on human cultural development, &#x2018;historical times&#x2019; being rather recent, after all.</p>
<p class="indent">In his unjustly maligned <i>The Sirius Mystery</i>, Robert Temple agrees with Sagan&#x2019;s hypothesis and speculates that if a physical extraterrestrial encounter occurred, it would have been between 5,000 <small>BCE</small> and 3,000 <small>BCE</small> &#x2013; a time he calls the Contact Era &#x2013; and it was this encounter that triggered the dramatic increase in social complexity we observe in Sumeria and Egypt at the time. While this astonishing increase in social complexity is still lacking a satisfactory explanation or explanations, this book has hopefully shown there are enough observable antecedents to the beliefs, practices, spirits and gods of Sumeria and Egypt to make the singular explanation, &#x2018;because aliens,&#x2019; insufficient. That being said, it is certainly worth observing in passing that the publication of <i>The Sirius Mystery</i> attracted constant CIA interference, including the wholesale theft of Temple&#x2019;s only copy of the translation of the original French source material, <i>The Pale Fox</i>, by a CIA asset in London in the 1970s as well as attempts to block the book&#x2019;s republication in the 1990s. Quite why the CIA would be interested in an anthropological account of hypothetical psychic contact between the Dogon tribe and beings from the Sirius system that has apparently been &#x2018;discredited&#x2019; has not been adequately explained. We have some ideas.</p>
<p class="indent">Despite this intriguing interlude, and the supporting opinions of some very informed experts, we must return to that notion of parsimony by looking first to that
<a id="page_248"></a>
which has not only been scientifically observed, but continues to operate on and interact with mankind into the present day; namely, a consciousness- or psi-based, largely nonphysical interaction or experience, rather than an explicitly Extraterrestrial Hypothesis (ETH). The ETH approach matches the available archaeological data less and less with each passing year, as more information regarding the complexity of the Palaeolithic as well as an increasingly precise understanding of hominin population movements comes to light. We should expect that trend to continue.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>NON-HUMAN LOGIC</b></p>
<p class="indent">Although sometimes admirably explored in science fiction, the ETH also regularly fails the non-human logic test. Why would an interplanetary species, having travelled across the vast reaches of space, set about insisting we naked apes build them triangular piles of rocks? If they came to teach us, why did they teach us how to scratch and scribble in river-clay tablets and not teach us cold fusion? Palaeolithic brains were actually larger than modern brains. Why did school end halfway through kindergarten? Why &#x2013; when mankind itself is but a decade away from capturing asteroids made of diamond, orbiting them around the moon and using robots to mine them &#x2013; did an interplanetary species fly past mineralogically rich, unoccupied planets and planetoids to build squishy chimps to mine gold on this one?</p>
<p class="indent">Here is where the practical magical perspective &#x2013; until quite recently unheard in (public) discussions in the UFO/UAP field &#x2013; can be particularly useful. Magicians have personal experience of non-human logic; what it feels like, how it manifests in life and culture, and so on. It is characterised by atemporality, high levels of coincidence, repetition of motif and symbol in entirely unrelated contexts and a quasi-fractal capacity to look weirdly resonant at whatever level you observe the phenomenon, from the micro to the macro. We could almost, and probably should, use these experiences as yardsticks to measure the &#x2018;non-humanity&#x2019; of particular signals or collections of experience, based on the reasonable hypothesis that non-human intelligences would communicate in non-human ways.</p>
<p class="indent">As an example of this sort of non-human &#x2018;cluster&#x2019; communication, we might use <i>The Sirius Mystery</i> and its author. Before writing it, Robert Temple was a friend and student of Arthur M. Young, twentieth century inventor and mystic (and genius, frankly). This gives us a vector running through Young&#x2019;s central American mushroom research &#x2013; thus touching on one of this book&#x2019;s cornerstone hypotheses &#x2013; his subsequent involvement with channelling Egyptian/extraterrestrial spirit beings known as the Nine &#x2013; thus touching another &#x2013; through to his sharing with Robert Temple the original anthropological work regarding the Dogon that would underpin <i>The Sirius Mystery</i>, a book that
<a id="page_249"></a>
was encouraged into publication by Temple&#x2019;s friend, Arthur C. Clarke. Prior to striking up this friendship, when Clarke observed the psi abilities of Uri Geller &#x2013; a Mossad asset whose CIA handler, Andrija Puharich, accompanied Young on his mushroom field trip &#x2013; he said it was &#x2018;<i>Childhood&#x2019;s End</i> come to life.&#x2019; Geller was briefly involved with the remote viewers who would go on to accurately psychically view parts of our solar system (and its apparent inhabitants) and also claimed to be in communication with an artificial intelligence communicating with him backwards through time. <i>Childhood&#x2019;s End</i> is one of Clarke&#x2019;s many science fiction novels. It describes a postwar earth where aliens that look exactly like medieval demons rule from an orbiting spaceship, institute a soft-fascist regime of global peace, and whose presence begins to trigger psi powers in a growing number of children. (Yes, it&#x2019;s excellent.) This was the book, rather than <i>2001</i>, that Stanley Kubrick actually wanted to turn into a film before claiming it was &#x2018;too expensive&#x2019; to shoot, which is patently untrue for someone of his skill and genius. Temple himself visited the set of <i>2001: A Space Odyssey</i> in London, thus providing a speculative fiction overlap with the notion of extradimensional/psi/extraterrestrial involvement in the development of the human species (as well as an overlap with problematizing the Apollo missions). After all this, it was reading <i>The Sirius Mystery</i> that inspired a young Robert Bauval to go on to investigate and then publish his work on Giza&#x2019;s Orion correlation in <i>The Orion Mystery</i>. All of this happened before the discovery of a 12,000 year old star temple, complete with <i>2001</i> ish &#x2018;monoliths,&#x2019; pointing at Orion and Sirius. This allows us to close the loop, so to speak, back into the psi/entheogen/ancient astrotheology narrative (and its implications) that is the subject of the book you are holding.</p>
<p class="indent">As is the case with most of &#x2018;alternate history,&#x2019; what looks to uncritical minds like conspiratorial knowledge passed down through the generations looks to my eyes like extradimensional agency operating at decidedly non-human timescales and for non-transparent purposes. (Fold the Crowley/Giza stuff from the previous chapter into the same through-line and it gets really interesting.) No one in the above chain of geniuses and remarkable researchers is working for &#x2018;the Illuminati.&#x2019; Instead, we observe a continuum that you can &#x2018;step into&#x2019; at any of the previously described &#x2018;nodes&#x2019; and still end up viewing the same motif or narrative. It is non-sequential communication. Which seems to me to better support an extradimensional/consciousness hypothesis than the ETH.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>LITTLE GREEN MEN</b></p>
<p class="indent">The hypothesis that mankind&#x2019;s civilising gods or spirits were, too use a cheekily disparaging term, &#x2018;little green men,&#x2019; relies on taking literally a personally preferred ancient
<a id="page_250"></a>
mythology, typically the Sumerian one. However, as we have seen, these are much, much younger variants of older spirits and storylines that, by definition, cannot literally be true, just as the reboot of a film is not the original film. At best, one could argue that there was an original contact event that triggered the emergence of a Laurasian storyline 20,000 to 30,000 years ago but such an argument &#x2013; like anything else &#x2013; has the ever present obligation of proof. For example, if &#x2018;they&#x2019; taught us writing, why did we wait so long to use it?</p>
<p class="indent">There is also the observation, first described by Jacques Vall&#x00E9;e five decades ago, that the phenomena are simply too common to have been the nuclei around which our original religions have formed. 13% of Americans today &#x2013; more than thirty million people &#x2013; believe they have been abducted by or otherwise encountered aliens, and these are just the ones that will admit it. Religions rarely form around experiences so common. Instead, there appears to be near continuous, albeit enigmatic, contact or observation with somethings throughout human history. Certainly these encounters or an explanation of them would have been, have been, incorporated into spiritual systems, but one has to be extremely selective with the evidence to suggest these events or beings triggered our first religions.</p>
<p class="indent">Finally, the suggestion that &#x2018;little green men&#x2019; are mankind&#x2019;s original teachers fails to account for the varying levels of technological complexity in cultures that supposedly received these teachings, as well as the clear evidence of uneven &#x2013; sometimes declining, sometimes advancing &#x2013; levels of technological sophistication. Instead, what we observe is the previously described &#x2018;runaway climate change&#x2019; effect that increased technological sophistication appears coincident with increased astronomical sophistication and declines along the same lines. Whether there is a causal relationship is almost beside the point if there is a &#x2018;consciousness entanglement&#x2019; effect in place. One indicates the other in such a scenario. When the teacher is &#x2018;in the classroom,&#x2019; we learn things. When the teacher is absent we do not. A singular explanation cannot account for this.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>A CONSCIOUSNESS EFFECT MODEL</b></p>
<p class="indent">One of the myths most commonly cited by proponents of the &#x2018;ancient aliens theory&#x2019; is the Vedic motif of the <i>vimanas</i>. Vimanas are artificial aircraft used by various gods and asuras to fly about the world and occasionally attack other aircraft or ground targets. This would seem to be a startlingly precise description of &#x2018;alien&#x2019; spacecraft were it not for the fact that, just like Ezekiel&#x2019;s vision and other &#x2018;mythological descriptions&#x2019; of supposed UFOs, calling these craft &#x2018;aerodynamically ambitious&#x2019; would be a kindness. And so there is an element of &#x2018;burying the lead&#x2019; here because there are
<a id="page_251"></a>
some compelling data to be extracted from these stories once one lets go of one&#x2019;s preferred interpretation. For instance, when the asura, King Salva, attacked Krishna&#x2019;s city of Dwarka, his vimana was observed to split apart, bounce along the surface of the ocean, and reabsorb its various split parts back into a whole, all while Krishna was firing projectiles at him from the city. Viewed dispassionately, this is remarkably reminiscent of Norway&#x2019;s &#x2018;Hessdalen Lights&#x2019;; an aerial phenomenon observed with surprising regularity. They also appear to behave as if consciously controlled and regularly split apart from each other before reforming, often moving around or through the mountains around the Hessdalen valley at tremendous speeds. The story of King Salva and the Hessdalen Lights offers some compelling parallels to the 9th century Lyon story of Magonia that gave Jacques Vall&#x00E9;e the title to his masterwork, <i>Passport to Magonia</i>. Bishop Agobard of Lyon observed a sky battle between competing wizards from the cloud realm of Magonia. Several occupants of one of the downed craft were even captured and kept for days. There is nothing in the good bishop&#x2019;s account that suggests these &#x2018;wizards&#x2019; had descended from the clouds to teach us about genetics or quantum computing. Mostly it is just complaints about the damage the Magonians caused to the local crops.</p>
<p class="indent">What this suggests is that there is a continuity of observation that can be used to calibrate ancient anomalous encounters that all-too-many of us hastily throw onto the &#x2018;proof of aliens&#x2019; bonfire. To say these beings &#x2018;aren&#x2019;t&#x2019; aliens is not to rob the myths of their potency. This very book rests on the proven hypothesis that local mythology can be a container for recognisable astronomical, climatic and consciousness-based experiences. The &#x2018;container assumption&#x2019; is required to interrogate what I believe to be the circumstantial mapping of the human journey out of Africa and the subsequent uneven rise of cultural and spiritual complexity. Such a mapping better incorporates &#x2018;complexity pivot points&#x2019; including:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> Encountering entheogens in the food supply and their resulting cultural impact.</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> The rise of precision astronomy in cultures where it is technologically redundant.</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> The notion that it was the (often enthegeonically-contacted) spirits that gave mankind astronomical and navigational skills, as well as conferring kingship.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Using a wider model accounts for the capricious nature or presentation of these phenomena. If they are our &#x2018;teachers&#x2019; then they are crack-addicted relief teachers who only show up to steal the lightbulbs from the faculty lounge. The universe owes us nothing and it is only our deep-seated psychological need for structure that attributes such nobility to the motives of phenomena that have <i>never</i> demonstrated
<a id="page_252"></a>
a coherent awareness of human morality, whatever and however useful that may be. Caveat emptor.</p>
<p class="indent">A &#x2018;capricious, sporadic spirit contact&#x2019; model not only leaves the door open for the perfectly reasonable &#x2013; although currently, materially irrelevant &#x2013; suggestion that earth has been visited by physical extraterrestrials at some stage in human history, it also provides a least worst set of assumptions with which we may explore these so-called teachings.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>&#x2018;TEACHING MACHINE&#x2019; EXPERIENCES</b></p>
<p class="indent">Perhaps one of the only genuinely global spiritual beliefs &#x2013; found in both Laurasian and Gondwanan cultures and thus suggesting it is Pan-Gaean &#x2013; is the notion that mankind was instructed in the ways of magic, culture, language, law and technology by the spirits. We invented very little. We were <i>shown</i> most of it.</p>
<p class="indent">An example from historical times, wellknown to western magicians, may be useful in &#x2018;backcasting&#x2019; certain scenarios; that is the creation of the Enochian alphabet and magical system by John Dee and Edward Kelley. The Enochian phase of Dee&#x2019;s fascinating life began in 1582 when Kelley saw an angel, &#x2018;the hythe of a little chylde,&#x2019; who profers them a shewstone. Dee would subsequently employ Edward Kelley as a seer and the two of them would go on to receive/create an alphabet and hundreds of words that are &#x2018;wrong&#x2019; in the sense that they do not exist but are remarkably consistent on an internal basis. This would be comparable to the experiences of Andrija Puharich and Uri Geller when the later began to receive tensor equations that were also &#x2018;wrong&#x2019; but internally consistent, and certainly well beyond the mathematical skills of a stage magician. Incidentally, Enochian words also appear sporadically in the &#x2018;channelled&#x2019; UFO literature of the mid-twentieth century.</p>
<p class="indent">Both Sumerian and Egyptian writing have observed pictographic antecedents but, especially in the case of Egyptian hieroglyphs, this is sort of like calling the wheel the direct antecedent of the stealth bomber. A strictly materialist, evolutionary hypothesis looks inadequate, especially when the Egyptians flatly stated that Thoth &#x2013; who lives on the moon, by the way &#x2013; taught them writing and when we have a number of similar experiences observed in the historical era. Jacques Vall&#x00E9;e opens <i>UFOs: The Psychic Solution</i> with five statements that will be useful in cohering these phenomena with an expanded view of human history as provided by genetics, linguistics and geology.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">1</span> The things we call unidentified flying objects are neither objects nor flying. They can dematerialize, as some recent photographs show, and they violate the laws of motion as we know them.</p>
<a id="page_253"></a>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">2</span> UFOs have been seen throughout history and have consistently received (or provided) their own explanation within the framework of each culture. In antiquity their occupants were regarded as gods; in medieval times, as magicians; in the nineteenth century, as scientific geniuses. And finally, in our own time, as interplanetary travellers. (Statements made by occupants of the 1897 airship included such declarations as &#x2018;We are from Kansas&#x2019; and even &#x2018;We are from ANYWHERE &#x2026; but we&#x2019;ll be in Cuba tomorrow.&#x2019;)</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">3</span> UFO reports are not necessarily caused by visits from space travellers. The phenomenon could be a manifestation of a much more complex technology. If time and space are not as simple in structure as physicists have assumed until now, then the question &#x2018;where do they come from?&#x2019; may be meaningless: they could come from a place in time. If consciousness can be manifested outside the body, then the range of hypotheses can be even wider.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">4</span> The key to an understanding of the phenomenon lies in the psychic effects it produces (or psychic awareness it makes possible) in its observers. Their lives are often deeply changed, and they develop unusual talents with which they may find it difficult to cope.</p>
<p class="numa"><span class="numa">5</span> Contact between human percipients and the UFO phenomenon occurs under conditions controlled by the latter. Its characteristic feature is a constant factor of absurdity that leads to a rejection of the story by the upper layers of the target society and an absorption at a deep unconscious level of the symbols conveyed in the encounter.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">In the light of these five statements, as well as the experiences of Dee and Geller, it is useful to consider a story told to Vall&#x00E9;e in the early 1970s by an engineer who encountered anomalous phenomena during an archaeological field trip when he was still a student. This engineer wandered away from the group, came to a clearing behind some trees and encountered a twenty-foot-wide disc with a translucent elevator that transported him aboard. &#x2018;As in a dream or a movie,&#x2019; the vehicle instantly transported him to a desolate area and deposited him on a hilltop beside a five-by-twenty-foot computer. (The encounter happened in the early 60s). He spent what he thought was three hours with the computer, reading row after row of &#x2018;recordings&#x2019; that transmitted &#x2018;advanced information&#x2019; directly into his mind, before the disc returned and flew him back to the same spot. What he thought was three hours turned out to be 18 days. His father, a government official (which may or may not be relevant), had had the military out looking for him. The engineer still had impeccable clothing, the flower in his lapel had not decayed and he did not need a shave. In the following six months, the
<a id="page_254"></a>
man required an abnormal amount of sleep, 13 hours a night, after which he needed less and less. At the time of his encounter with Dr Vall&#x00E9;e, over a decade later, he said he still only needed a few hours a night, and had not had, or at least recalled, a single dream since the incident. His experiences at university changed as well: he instantly understood and recalled with perfect clarity everything he was taught. He also believed he had psychokinetic powers as well as the ability to astral project at will.</p>
<p class="indent">If you swap the giant, 1960s computer with the classic shamanic &#x2018;Otherworld,&#x2019; then this is a story as old as time. But even the presence of the computer is quite illustrative. These phenomena appear in the most technologically advanced way possible for each individual culture, which is why over the last 150 years the aerial components have gone from airships in the late 1800s, to flying saucers in the mid twentieth century to triangles or chevrons in a post-stealth-bomber world. As a thought experiment, let us replace this engineer with, for example, Imhotep, and keep the story the same. Imhotep vanishes for days and then returns with stories of encountering the gods wherein they showed him how to liquefy and pour rock &#x2018;in honour of Them.&#x2019; The complete design for Djoser&#x2019;s Heb Sed temple, right down to the exact number of false doors and pylons, is recalled with perfect clarity. This temple reliably replicates the spirit contact experience Imhotep himself went through. He remains in psychic contact with his tutelary gods, Ptah and Thoth, for the rest of his life and often sleep-journeys back to visit them for further tuition.</p>
<p class="indent">Let us try another thought experiment, and jump back 10,000 years from Imhotep to a Eurasian shaman. He is not overly interested in improvements to stoneworking technology, but he is interested in knowing which valleys the deer will run down upon their return from the north. Unlike Imhotep, his spirits do not transport him to a gleaming stone city but to an open plain under a warm, clear night sky, where great fires have been lit and masked revellers feast and dance under constellations both familiar and unfamiliar. Nevertheless, he returns with a precise map of the valleys and rivers where the deer will run and the men of his tribe have a successful hunting season that year. He begins to sing to the constellations he recognises from his night journey. They ask for stones to be erected in their honour.</p>
<p class="indent">This sort of sustained, culture-specific form of contact is what Dr Vall&#x00E9;e refers to as a &#x2018;control system.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">If the hypothesis is true, then what the witnesses have seen were manifestations of a process not unlike that of a thermostat in a house. The thermostat is a mechanism that stabilises the relationship between our body temperature requirements and the changing weather outside. Similarly, UFOs may serve to stabilize the relationship
<a id="page_255"></a>
between man&#x2019;s consciousness needs and the evolving complexities of the world which he must understand.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Let us return, then, to Robert Temple&#x2019;s notion of a &#x2018;Contact Era&#x2019; between 5,000 <small>BCE</small> and 3,000 <small>BCE</small>. Viewed without the automatically-appended context of physical alien visitation, there is much to recommend a modified version of the concept. Specifically, that would be an improved and improving capacity for experiencing or even deliberately triggering whatever the phenomena we have just explored actually &#x2018;are.&#x2019; Such a &#x2018;modified Contact Era&#x2019; model would go a considerable way to providing an improved explanation/interpretation for the similarities between the &#x2018;original civilisations&#x2019; of Indus, Sumer and Egypt that cannot be accounted for via trade and genetic contact: we could go so far as to suggest they may have been having similar &#x2018;teaching machine&#x2019; experiences viewed through the lenses of their respective cultures.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>COUNTER-CHECKING THE HYPOTHESIS</b></p>
<p class="indent">On the surface, it may seem an entirely reasonable objection to say that we simply do not know the contents of the ancient mind, thus any attempt to do so is pure conjecture. Such a sentiment typically emerges out of academia&#x2019;s post-traumatic, postmodernist response to the cosy universalism of an earlier age. Any form of comparative analysis is largely so woefully out of fashion that it has been relegated to the cupboard behind the shoulder pads and perming rods. But in rejecting the flawed notion that &#x2018;everything is the one thing,&#x2019; it need not follow that &#x2018;nothing is the same as any other thing.&#x2019; Particularly thanks to advances in biology, morphology and consciousness studies, there are some opportunities to compare modern experiences to ancient in pursuit of a hypothesis, without suggesting that our ancestors conceptualised the world in exactly the same way.</p>
<p class="indent">The first two potential similarities are instructive on at least a personal level, and the latter two on a wider cultural one.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>Entheogenic Experiences</b></p>
<p class="indent">Here in the opening act of the twenty first century, we are in a position to observe with a high degree of confidence that the human brain has remained almost entirely unchanged for hundreds of millennia. We also have a large number of clinical studies documenting the effects of psychoactive substances such as DMT and psilocybin on the modern brain &#x2013; and thus the modern mind. This provides us with a valuable vector of enquiry in hypothesising about the minds of ancient men in cultures that we know overlapped with the presence of these substances in the local environment.</p>
<a id="page_256"></a>
<p class="indent">Such data facilitate both positive and negative hypotheses. On the positive side, it allows us to &#x2018;match&#x2019; physical and cultural artefacts to the images and visions seen by modern minds under the influence of psychoactive substances. Some of these results are particularly compelling. As Dr Sheldrake observes, there is no acceptable materialist reason why a born and bred Londoner would experience jungle imagery such as panthers, pythons and dense greenery under the influence of ayahuasca taken in, say, Chiswick. Nevertheless, a high volume of urban, western experiencers report such imagery and encounters. This suggests that either the imagery is somehow inherent in the molecule itself &#x2013; which would still allow us to undertake comparative analysis &#x2013; or, more likely, the molecule provides access to an independently existent, nonphysical reality &#x2013; which would certainly allow us to undertake comparative analysis.</p>
<p class="indent">On the negative side, we can also anthropologically observe the contemporary use of entheogens in cultures that have &#x2018;declined&#x2019; away from its ritual use. As Gast&#x00F3;n Guzm&#x00E1;n noted in his twentieth century ethnomycological study of Papua New Guinea, many of the tribes no longer use the locally-occurring psilocybin and boletus mushrooms in ceremonies. Much of this appears to be due to the impact of deforestation reducing encounter rates among the hunter-gatherer tribes. On the rare occasions when these mushrooms are consumed, presumably accidentally, they can lead to violence and murder.</p>
<p class="indent">Examining the contemporary experience of psychoactives in cultures that have &#x2018;fallen away&#x2019; from their ritual use is an essential counterpoint to the universalist tendency to sort of &#x2018;spread&#x2019; the Mesoamerican experience of psilocybin into any culture where the molecule is naturally occurring. That is a tactic straight out of the Choronzon School of Anthropology.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>Contemporary Magical Experience</b></p>
<p class="indent">Contentious, supremely personal and near-impossible to draw quantifiable conclusions from, the contemporary magical experience nevertheless seems a legitimate source of counter-checking for the wider hypothesis. It is not so much the <i>content</i> of contemporary magical experience &#x2013; that overused phrase, &#x2018;personal gnosis&#x2019; &#x2013; so much as it is its <i>context</i>. Recall, for instance, the experience of the reception of <i>The Book of the Law</i> from the previous chapter.</p>
<p class="indent">Contemporary magical experience can be marshalled to countercheck the hypothesis not in terms of &#x2018;the spirits told me this is what happened&#x2019; (for they are ever-unreliable narrators) but in the wider synchronicitous context in which it occurs: what kind of &#x2018;non-human logic&#x2019; was discerned in its aftereffects?</p>
<a id="page_257"></a>
<p class="h3"><b>A Modern &#x2018;Contact Era&#x2019;?</b></p>
<p class="indent">We move toward ever more speculative means of counter-checking. If the hypothesis holds that increases in technological complexity are associated with increasingly sophisticated astronomy and astrotheology, and that both are associated with an increase in what we still call UFO phenomena, then perhaps we need look no further than the twentieth century itself for a counter-check?</p>
<p class="indent">Consider the fact that it was in this century, particularly in the decades after World War II, that mankind achieved the greatest ever increases in technological complexity in our entire two million year history. While many of the UFO phenomena observed during this period &#x2013; perhaps even most &#x2013; were Cold War cover stories, these years could still be characterised as a flap of UFO flaps.</p>
<p class="indent">What else were we doing during this era? Building precision space platforms that physically took humans off the earth for the first time, installing telescopes in orbit and sending robots to planets named after ancient gods.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>Ancient NDEs</b></p>
<p class="indent">Many readers will no doubt already be aware of my particular interest in the Near Death Experience. Since the installation of defibrillators in ambulances in the 1960s, we have had a reliable way of bringing people back from the leading cause of death in the world. Thus we have accrued a dataset that is vast in both number and implications, often actual clinical conditions. There is simply no better source from which to draw upon in determining which parts of the human consciousness experience: leaving the body, visiting geographically distant locations on earth, the continuity of one&#x2019;s ancestors and the &#x2018;shape&#x2019; of any potential afterlife.</p>
<p class="indent">In his book, <i>Conception of the Afterlife in Early Civilizations</i>, Gregory Shushan admirably attempts to map many of these experiences to mythological descriptions of afterlife journeys, magical night flights, the achievement of immortality, and so on. In doing so, he wades through some of the crudest academic dismissal of in-your-face evidence seen this side of Egyptology.</p>
<p class="quote">[T]he issue of universality is controversial in NDE studies, with some researchers promoting cross-cultural difference at the expense of similarity. For example, in his assessment of perhaps the earliest western NDE account which explicitly claims to be factual (related by the Greek philosopher Clearchus of Soli, <small>C</small>. 310 <small>BCE</small>), Bremmer &#x2026; states that the only similarity between the account and the modern NDE is a &#x2018;feeling of drifting away.&#x2019; This, despite clear references to typical NDE elements such as OBE, meeting deceased relatives, moral evaluation assisted by mystical/divine beings, and clairvoyance. In a study of Chinese NDEs, the researchers (Zhi-ying and
<a id="page_258"></a>
Jian-xun 1992) seem to have interpreted cultural/individual expressions of typical NDE elements as dissimilarities. Sensations of weightlessness and &#x2018;feeling estranged from the body,&#x2019; for example, must surely be equated with the OBE. &#x2018;Unusually vivid thoughts,&#x2019; a feeling that thought has sped up, a sense of peace and euphoria, and a life review are all standard NDE elements reported by their subjects. Murphy (2001) states that there is no being of light in Thai NDEs &#x2013; despite reports of the Buddha appearing as a star, and an encounter with &#x2018;spiritual lights.&#x2019; (ibid.) He also states that Thai NDErs do not report feelings of bliss, ecstasy, peace and the like, but rather &#x2018;pleasantness, comfort, a sense of beauty and happiness.&#x2019; Rather than seeing these as analogous emotional states, he sees discontinuity. Encounters with deceased friends and relatives are similarly classified as dissimilarities because they do not specifically greet the NDEr, but rather instruct him/her. Murphy&#x2019;s conclusion that &#x2018;accounts of Western NDEs would seem to be useless in helping Thais know what to expect at their deaths&#x2019; is not supported by Thai references to OBE, travelling in spiritual form to another realm, life review with moral evaluation, encounters with divine/mystical presences, positive emotions, transcendent feelings and an impression of knowing &#x2018;all the truths of the universe,&#x2019; visions of the future, deceased relatives, and being instructed to return.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Cross-cultural comparison is obviously not identical to cross-temporal comparison, but hopefully we have demonstrated that not everything needs to be the same thing for comparative examination to still have some use. Especially when you consider the academics just described are pitching nothing but deliberately misinterpreted balderdash in support of a dominant, anti-comparative agenda.</p>
<p class="indent">It seems likely that a comparative analysis can also provide insight into the <i>personal esoteric experiences</i> at the heart of the Laurasian storyline. For any initiatory ritual to &#x2018;work,&#x2019; be it a Heb Sed or the installation of a new tribal chieftain or shaman, it must necessarily be experienced as consciousness effects.</p>
<p class="indent">Beginning with Vedic India, Shushan interprets the symbolism of the solar/underworld journey. Each day, the sun emerges from the stone of Varuna, which is equated with Yamaloka, the underrealm of the god of Death. Shushan writes:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">The deceased thus journeys with the sun through the netherworld on its way to the dawn. This is done via sailing a boat on the primeval ocean. The soul is a microcosm of the sun, an inner light hidden in the heart, just as the sun hides under the earth. Birds are symbolic of both the sun and this inner light. The celestial and subterranean worlds are associated with each other when the visionary in the text
<a id="page_259"></a>
equates the face of Agni (god of fire, light and the sun) with that of Varuna; and with the father-son relationship of sun-god and netherworld god. Elsewhere it is stated that Soma enables one to see the light of heaven and to find the sun.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">An underworld that is also the night sky, a boat journey on a primeval ocean, the heart as home of the soul that is also equated with the sun and solar birds. So far so &#x2018;Egyptian royal burial.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="indent">Let us now consider Gilgamesh. Although it appears that the Sumerian gods denied mankind immortality, Shushan observes that the fact they installed Gilgamesh as a divine judge suggests that it was <i>physical immortality</i> that was denied to us, as opposed to a posthumous continuity of existence. There are further elements to the Gilgamesh story that not only map a hypothetical Laurasian esoteric experience, but also the classic NDE experience.</p>
<p class="indent">In seeking Utnapishtim, Gilgamesh travels along &#x2018;the hidden road where the sun rises,&#x2019; around &#x2018;mountains.&#x2019; Shushan notes that the word for mountain, <i>kur</i>, also means Netherworld. Gilgamesh encounters the Scorpion People &#x2013; likely asterisms &#x2013; who guard the sun&#x2019;s gate at both horizons. This is very suggestive of the Vedic journey, especially when you factor in the boat journey across the underworld waters of Ea that he must undertake to find Utnapishtim.</p>
<p class="indent">In one of the earliest versions of his epic, Gilgamesh asks the sun god, Shamash, if the netherworld is a place of rest because he has been asleep &#x2018;all these years.&#x2019; He continues by saying &#x2018;but now let my eyes look on the sun so I am sated with light. The darkness is hidden. How much light is there? When may a dead man see the rays of the sun?&#x2019; Shushan cautions that these should not be considered rhetorical questions. Gilgamesh, especially given his preoccupation with immortality, is clearly on a quest to achieve it. Shushan observes, &#x2018;[t]hat he addresses these questions to the sun-god before entering the mountain further demonstrates that he is indeed embarking on a solar/underworld journey.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="indent">Again we have the sun journey/primeval ocean/stellar underworld component with an additional explicit reference to the face of the sun and its role in achieving immortality &#x2013; as in Vedic India and Egypt. There are further descriptions in the Gilgamesh story that would be extremely familiar to someone who has had an NDE. As we have learned, Dilmun eventually lent its name to a trading partner of the Sumerian/Babylonian cultures, but it was also the name of a &#x2018;pristine&#x2019; land of peace, silence, abundant grain fields, clear fresh water and light; a realm where animals do not attack humans or steal their food, and where sickness and death is unknown. This may as well be a description of the Egyptian afterlife straight out of the New Kingdom
<a id="page_260"></a>
Books of the Dead as a perfectly serviceable description of heaven from modern NDE encounters.</p>
<p class="indent">Perhaps making the NDE association even more explicit, after entering the mountain (netherworld), Gilgamesh outruns the sun and emerges into the &#x2018;bright light of a jewelled garden.&#x2019; The garden is the commonest setting for an NDE encounter with deceased relatives and wisdom teachers. It is here that Utnapishtim confers his magical secrets to Gilgamesh, who is washed and given new clothes &#x2013; a clear symbol of his subsequent transformation. Gilgamesh finds his plant of immortality &#x2013; a Soma analogue &#x2013; but it is stolen by a snake, which is not only the earliest god of man available in the archaeological record, but also among the commonest visions described by those under the influence of entheogens (particularly DMT). There is thus a highly compelling match between the motifs associated with the more &#x2018;esoteric&#x2019; Laurasian storylines and contemporary experiences of both NDEs and entheogens. And so, inevitably, to Egypt.</p>
<p class="indent">Emerging with the Middle Kingdom as part of the general democratisation of the afterlife, we have the classic &#x2018;weighing of the heart in the court of Osiris&#x2019; motif, which would persist until the fall of Alexandria, thousands of years later. Shushan asks the question, what is this but a life review? The Egyptians delighted in their magical capacity to contact or visit the otherworld; their famous board game, Senet, is built around the shamanic capacity to visit the land of the dead and return. To be proficient in the game was to demonstrate your mastery over such a treacherous, albeit essential, journey.</p>
<p class="indent">The same motifs of solar faces, night journeys with the sun through a stellar underworld, boats, solar birds and the individual securing of immortality through magic that we see in the Old Kingdom rituals of the pyramids and Heb Sed festivals recur in the other &#x2018;high Laurasian&#x2019; civilisations of Vedic India and Sumeria. It is to be expected that, as Egypt picked up the pieces of the collapse of the Old Kingdom, many of these experiences and motifs would recur in a more distributed fashion. Here is Shushan&#x2019;s summation of his mapping of the Egyptian afterlife experience with NDEs:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">[D]espite some uncertainties of language and meaning, it is clear that multiple yet unified experiences are being described. In addition to encounters with/transformations into divine beings, the Egyptian afterlife includes leaving the body in spiritual form and journeying to realms which are considered the &#x2018;home&#x2019; or origin state, an encounter with one&#x2019;s own corpse leading to the realization of one&#x2019;s spiritual immortality, entering darkness and emerging into light via descent into and ascent from the Duat, water crossings and ferrymen, interrogations with a stress
<a id="page_261"></a>
on the knowledge of the deceased, meeting one&#x2019;s deceased relatives, judgement or self-judgement based on one&#x2019;s earthly moral conduct, a panoramic life review, obstacles/barriers and perils with the threat of annihilation, and a cyclical existence of continual rebirth and renewal.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Clearly there are some very specific corollaries between the ancient encounters with the sacred and modern consciousness experiences. Any possibility of learning from or being inspired by not only our ancient but also our Palaeolithic ancestors relies on such an observation.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>FURTHER HISTORICAL SURVIVALS</b></p>
<p class="indent">In addition to discernable consciousness effects in the mythology of the ancient world, the historical period also presents us with hundreds of anomalous encounters &#x2013; some of which have shaped the course of empires &#x2013; that suggest further continuities of contact, experience and &#x2018;thermostat manipulation.&#x2019; Many of these are described in religious terms but are clearly extradimensional encounters. These include the Miracle at Fatima and the story of the Virgin of Guadalupe, complete with its own light show in the sky and radiation effects on plant life. In fact the extradimensional Mary stories are so numerous that Jacques Vall&#x00E9;e refers to them in their own separate category as &#x2018;the technology of the BVM.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="indent">Below are a few examples, drawn largely from Vall&#x00E9;e and Chris Aubeck&#x2019;s highly recommended <i>Wonders in the Sky</i>, that are representative of the range of encounters we have every reason to suspect happened during the distant Palaeolithic era.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> <i>Apulia</i>, 216 <small>BCE</small>: During Rome&#x2019;s largest defeat at the hands of Hannibal, &#x2018;in the sky above Apulia, round objects in the shape of ships were seen. The prodigies carried on all night long. On the edge of such objects were seen men dressed in white, like clergymen around a plough.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> <i>Constantinople</i>, 438 <small>CE</small>: As the citizens were fleeing an earthquake that levelled much of the city, a child was suddenly lifted into the sky &#x2018;by a strong force,&#x2019; so high that he vanished from the view of the people. Upon his slow return to earth, he told the emperor that he had &#x2018;attended a great concert of the Angels hailing the Lord in their sacred canticles.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> <i>Syburg, Germany</i>, 776 <small>CE</small>: Saxons rebelling against Charlemagne witnessed &#x2018;two shields red with flame wheeling over the church.&#x2019; They were so frightened they fled the siege they had laid upon the castle and were defeated.</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> <i>Florence</i>, 1347 <small>CE</small>: During an outbreak of the Plague, residents witnessed &#x2018;strange
<a id="page_262"></a>
cigar-shaped objects slowly crossing the sky, sometimes at low altitude, dispersing in their passage a disturbing mist.&#x2019; Epidemics followed their appearance.</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> <i>Milan</i>, 1491 <small>CE</small>: Seven mysterious men dressed in togas and &#x2018;wearing shining shoes&#x2019; appeared one night in the study of the local philosopher and friend of Da Vinci, Fazio Cardano. They confessed to being creatures of air who died just as men did, although they could live for up to three centuries. When Cardano asked them to show him treasures they said they were forbidden from doing so &#x2018;by a peculiar law.&#x2019; They stayed with him for over three hours during which he interrogated them about God and the universe, and there was no unity in their answers. One suggested that, contrary to the Bible, God created the universe &#x2018;moment to moment&#x2019; and that if he stopped, &#x2018;the world would perish.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> <i>Bahamas</i>, 1492 <small>CE</small>: From his ship, Christopher Columbus witnesses a light &#x2018;like the light of a wax candle moving up and down&#x2019; in the night sky. Although some believed it to come from land, it was deemed too small. No land was sighted.</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> <i>Waldstadt, Germany</i>, 1551 <small>CE</small>: A woman who got drunk and uttered blasphemies at a party was taken up into the air by the Devil &#x2018;in the presence of everyone.&#x2019; She was lifted up and hovered over the edge of the village, as the revellers followed after her on the ground, whereupon she was dropped to her death with the whole town watching.</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> <i>Wiltshire</i>, 1634 <small>CE</small>: A curate at a local school, while walking over the Downs, encountered a group of dancing elves in a fairy ring. He was paralysed on the spot and fell to the ground. The elves surrounded him and &#x2018;pinch&#x2019;d him all over, and made a sorte of quick humming noyse all the time.&#x2019; He awoke to find himself in the centre of a freshly-pressed fairy ring in the grass.</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> <i>London</i>, 1670 <small>CE</small>: From her teenage years, Jane Lead (n&#x00E9;e Ward) of Norfolk confessed to hearing divine voices. In 1670 she described encountering a cloud with a brilliant woman inside it, &#x2018;her Face as the terrible Crystal for brightness, but her Countenance sweet and mild.&#x2019; She would go on to write about her repeated abductions at the hands of beings who were neither devils nor angels. She called these abductions &#x2018;Transports.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Clearly there are patterns worth exploring here, and it is only the &#x2018;absence of evidence&#x2019; challenge that restricts our interpretation of both our earliest available mythologies as well as the implications of Palaeolithic architecture. We must move past the binary of &#x2018;physical evidence as described by materialist archaeologists&#x2019; and the &#x2018;anything goes&#x2019; world of personal spiritual gnosis. Much is to be gained from a more coherent analysis.</p>
<a id="page_263"></a>
<p class="h3"><b>AN INCOMPLETE LIST OF CHILDREN</b></p>
<p class="indent">Given the persistence of ritual &#x2018;shape&#x2019; down through the centuries, surprisingly few grimoire spirits are directly connectable on a nominal basis to the gods of the ancient world. It seems to me there are a number of important reasons for this.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> I believe the impact of local mythology is underemphasised in the grimoires. If you think about the gods and beasties of the classical world, they all had names. By the time we get to the Golden Legend, they are largely nameless. In at least some cases, I suspect local monster legends provided the names to would-be transcribers.</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> Although there is a high degree of conservatism in the <i>nomina magica</i>, we are nevertheless dealing with spirit lists that were originally written down phonetically so as to ensure correct pronunciation, and then parsed through multiple languages, depending on their route into Europe: Greek, Latin, Arabic, German, Italian, Hebrew. They then bounce around internally for centuries.</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> The sheer lack of textual evidence. Honestly, it cannot be overemphasised just how few written texts pertaining to magic survived from the end of the Classical Age. If secondary titles for spirits, decans or asterisms were used, then it becomes doubly difficult.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Not that it matters much. As we have seen through the development of Gondwana motifs into the Laurasian storyline and then on into the historical period, it is the form or shape, rather than the title, which is conserved across language and time. The purpose of this book is to suggest that some aspects of the western tradition that have tumbled down to us along grimoire lines have evidently been tumbling for a very, very long time and not &#x2013; perish the very thought &#x2013; that the grimoire tradition has its origins in the deepest Palaeolithic. Some of these magical motifs that can be traced to the Classical World invite a practical reappraisal in light of their apparently dramatically lengthened timescales. For me, it is comforting to ponder upon the fact that the crane, the peacock, the bull, the seven sisters, the serpent or dragon, Cerberus/Naberus and even the very Devil himself in the form of the Pan-Gaean Trickster have not only been our spirit companions since the fall of Alexandria, but for much of &#x2013; and in some cases the entire &#x2013; human journey. It is doubly comforting to look up and still see them in the sky, and know that the our distant ancestors were telling bull stories about <i>those</i> very stars, or bear stories about <i>those</i> ones, or ship stories about <i>that</i> one.</p>
<p class="indent">As with all aspects of western magic, the race to reconstruction is heartily discouraged. In fact, if your takeaway from reading this far is an urgent need to recreate
<a id="page_264"></a>
a Palaeolithic spirituality based on the implications of the partially excavated site of G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe, I will find you and personally knock this book out of your hands on a crowded train. Instead, <i>recontextualisation</i> of existing practices as they have arrived down through the centuries to us is encouraged. I would even say mandatory.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>Astaroth</b></p>
<p class="indent">Because I promised her I would, I am singling out Astaroth as the example of mankind&#x2019;s long-lived spirit companion par excellence. Have Jake Stratton-Kent catch you up to speed. From <i>The True Grimoire</i>:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">The history of Astaroth in the Middle East and Egypt is long and complex. It involves millennia of time, a vast swathe of geography and several language groups, besides a multiplicity of roles. Just one of her oldest forms, the Sumerian Inanna, has been called the many-faceted goddess.[&#x2026;]</p>
<p class="quotei">[T]he lion is &#x2013; as with other storm deities &#x2013; a key attribute. She drives a chariot drawn by lions, rides a lion, or is herself a lion.[..]</p>
<p class="quotei">Another key role of Inanna is as goddess of Venus as both the Morning and Evening Star &#x2026; As Evening Star &#x2026; she judges the just and the unjust. As the Morning Star represented productive work, so the Evening Star represented rest and recreation, and another key role of Inanna follows from this; Inanna as harlot, goddess of music and dance, the protector of prostitutes and of ale houses. The Morning Star &#x2026; was also associated with her as goddess of war, a symbolism of surprisingly wide distribution among people of Asiatic descent.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Inevitably, Jake is correct regarding the widespread distribution of the association between Venus as the Morning Star and goddess of war. And, as Dr Witzel teaches us, where we find widespread distribution we are likely looking at a significantly earlier origin for the motif. This is to be expected given Inanna&#x2019;s prominence in Sumerian mythology which, as discussed, sprung &#x2018;fully-formed&#x2019; as a quintessential Laurasian storyline around 3,500 <small>BCE</small>, thus implying significantly earlier antecedents.</p>
<p class="indent">You will recall that Sarasvati was originally a river goddess, likely originating before the end of the Ice Age given that her river &#x2013; described in full flow in the oldest Vedic texts &#x2013; had long since dried up by the time they were apparently written down. In these same early texts, she is also a goddess of war and victory, then later adding patroness of music and fine arts to her portfolio. Through her identification with the goddess Vac in Brahmanic texts, she is also addressed as a lioness and goddess of victory. Asko Parpola believes he has traced the etymology of <i>vac</i> to the Proto-Dravidic
<a id="page_265"></a>
word meaning &#x2018;voice, sound, song, war-cry, shout of excitement or joy,&#x2019; which as a verb means to &#x2018;roar (like a lion or a river), summon, make known or reveal&#x2019; (as in daybreak). The term is even a homonym for &#x2018;daybreak,&#x2019; &#x2018;lamp&#x2019; and &#x2018;Venus&#x2019;; all concepts clearly associated with Inanna in her guise as goddess of victory. Parpola writes:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">Thus the lighted lamp (<i>vilakku</i>/<i>vilakkam</i> in Tamil and Malayalam) is a central cultic symbol for the goddess of victory, who as Light annihilates the dark forces of night and death. In Mesopotamia, the planet Venus, the brightest morning and evening star, is a symbol of Inanna-I&#x0161;tar, the Goddess of War and Sex, and in the Hindu tradition, Friday, connected with the planet Venus, is associated with women and the goddess.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">What this means is that if the Laurasian model holds, the being we have come to know as Astaroth, currently enshrined on my humble little altar in west London, &#x2018;whose DNA,&#x2019; in the words of Peter Grey in <i>Lucifer: Princeps</i>, &#x2018;luminesces in the vision of Revelation as the Whore of Babylon,&#x2019; was once summoned by the banks of a long-dead, roaring glacial river to bring victory in battle over neighbouring Ice Age tribes.</p>
<p class="indent">Approach with newfound caution and humility.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>The Headless Rite</b></p>
<p class="indent">In a compelling example of the sort of non-human logic described at the opening of this chapter, we have the Headless Rite. Straddling the modern and supremely ancient world, it is an invocation of an asterism that led tribes across the globe for tens of millennia, that had &#x2018;headless&#x2019; star temples raised in honour of it and its consort where hunters would feast, take drugs and learn the skills of grain cultivation, that became associated with stellar immortality (and still grain) to such an extent that great stone maps of it were built upon the earth. In a transparently shamanic survival, alignment with this asterism conferred kingship over the realm of the spirits. So potent was the initiatory power of headlessness &#x2013; to have one&#x2019;s head in another realm &#x2013; that it has survived into two of the three great religions of the Near East in the form of John the Baptist, who &#x2018;initiates&#x2019; Christ and thus brings that same promise of victory over death back down to earth.</p>
<p class="indent">How or why could you possibly improve on that? There is no need to toddle off to Devon for a &#x2018;shamanic initiation&#x2019; weekend. The blood spilled at G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe still stains the Headless Rite&#x2019;s words of power. Speak them.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>