<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Star.Ships</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_266"></a>
<p class="chapa" style="margin-left: 89px;"><i>Everything under creation</i> [&#x2026;] <i>is represented in the ground and in the sky</i>. David Bungal Mowaljarlai, Ngarinyin elder</p>
<p class="chaptitle1w"><b>CANOPY OF STARS</b></p>
<p class="indent" style="margin-top:2em;">How would you describe a hologram to a Neanderthal shaman? As our understanding of space and the wider universe out beyond our gravity well &#x2013; and our explorations of inner space &#x2013; continue to deepen, it becomes clearer and clearer that we are playing in a bigger game than we had hitherto presumed.</p>
<p class="indent">Has something tried to describe a hologram to a Neanderthal? What if the Neanderthal had asked perfectly reasonable questions like &#x2018;what is this place?&#x2019; or &#x2018;what is it made of?&#x2019; or &#x2018;how does it work?&#x2019; How would such answers be reflected in the culture that asked them? Let us not pretend for a moment that these questions did not pass through the minds of early humans. Mircea Eliade believed that all creation myths were an attempt to explain how consciousness, how self-awareness, first arose. Interesting then, in the context of just who would be answering, that Dr Witzel&#x2019;s research suggests it is the Trickster, at a time depth of more than 70,000 years, who is our first culture hero and civilising god, and that providing us with answers may have violated some sort of cosmic taboo.</p>
<a id="page_267"></a>
<p class="indent">I believe Dr Witzel is probably correct in his findings that the Trickster sits at the very bottom of our global tree of gods. &#x2018;Trickster&#x2019; is the best mythic description of the capricious, unreliable, sometimes truthful, sometimes deliberately manipulative nature of whatever the UFO/extradimensional/spirit phenomenon actually is. We appear to be dealing with &#x2013; and have been dealing with for a very long time &#x2013; a range of phenomena with at least one subset interested in &#x2018;teaching&#x2019; us or otherwise transmitting knowledge in an oblique fashion. This knowledge appears designed to impress us with its slight superiority and &#x2018;inspire&#x2019; us in specific directions. Consider how its presentation has changed over the millennia, from therianthropic gods to demons to angels to flying chariots to elves and fairies to the Virgin Mary to airships to flying saucers to cigar-shaped craft to flying triangles. In 1997, what are now known as the Phoenix Lights were witnessed by thousands of modern Americans, including air force pilots who were scrambled to intercept the phenomenon. It was described as a giant, silent, triangular craft with a wingspan the size of several football fields. Would a family group living on the plains of Southern Africa 70,000 years ago have the cultural context to interpret that phenomenon? Would they even be able to see it?</p>
<p class="indent">Since leaving Africa, the human story appears to be one of colonising and exploring a physical world that is deeply and intrinsically interrelated with at least one other higher or extradimensional realm. From the scant but nevertheless compelling evidence of the ritual activity of other hominins, particularly Neanderthals, we were not alone in attracting the interest or attention of this other realm. Each year, more and more archaeological and genetic evidence paints a picture of a Palaeolithic world rich in culture, nuance and star lore. It must be remembered that the vast majority of human existence was lived in this state &#x2013; in a hunter-gatherer world, free of light pollution and populated with near-genetic neighbours (and at least one hobbit) that we occasionally interbred with. Perhaps we have fallen away from this state of awareness? Perhaps &#x2018;they&#x2019; have fallen away from us?</p>
<p class="indent">Just how far one wishes to follow this line of reasoning is entirely personal. Famously, Princeton psychology professor Julian Jaynes suggested in the 1970s that, prior to 1250 <small>BC</small>, the entire human race literally heard voices in their head which they considered to be from their gods, spirits and ancestors. It is really more of a thought experiment than an actual theory owing to its complete unfalsifiability, but it is instructive nonetheless. Firstly, most textual sources state explicitly that the gods spoke to Gilgamesh or Achilles or Ramses, and Jaynes used the more recent example of Joan of Arc by way of comparison.</p>
<p class="indent">The hearing of literal voices was Jaynes&#x2019;s frankly quite reasonable explanation for some bizarre burial practices, including live internment of servants and the provision
<a id="page_268"></a>
of loaves of bread: &#x2018;This practice has no clear explanation except that their voices were still being heard and perhaps demanding such accommodation.&#x2019; More interestingly, he &#x2013; correctly, to my mind &#x2013; dismissed the fertility explanation for the explosion of figurines and life-size images in the closing years of the Neolithic given that fertility did not appear to be a problem among the people who fashioned them. Instead he suggested that these figures actually spoke and were heard by the tribespeople. (It certainly throws Old Kingdom royal cults into new light.) Precedent for such behaviour includes the biblical description of the King of Babylon &#x2018;consulting with images&#x2019; or the Aztecs&#x2019; story to the Spanish that their civilisation began when a statue in an ancient, ruined temple began instructing their leaders.</p>
<p class="indent">Inevitably for a psychological theory that is almost forty years old, it relies on some wildly outdated speculation regarding brain function and falls into the modern trap of assuming our ancestors were dumb or savage. The point, nevertheless, is well made: if we consider Jaynes&#x2019;s theory to be &#x2018;100% spirit contact&#x2019; and the contemporary western world to be around &#x2018;6% spirit contact,&#x2019; there is simply no way to know quite how literally these consciousness effects were experienced, or where the people of the Palaeolithic fell on the &#x2018;spirit scale.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="h3"><b>COMPLEXITY OF RECEIVED INFORMATION</b></p>
<p class="indent">Another reason why Jaynes&#x2019;s theory is not well-loved in magical circles is the implications that the voices heard in one&#x2019;s head were &#x2018;made up&#x2019; rather than issuing from some external source of agency. This, at least, is a testable hypothesis, and the evidence points, in some instances, to transmission from external sources. If you do not like this idea, you can simply expand the concept of consciousness to the unconscious to the collective unconscious and achieve the same result.</p>
<p class="indent">Returning to the Dogon, the notion that they &#x2018;tricked&#x2019; their French anthropologists with their knowledge of the invisible-to-the-naked-eye Sirius B, or that the anthropologists made it up, is nonsense. The tribe also managed to describe its elliptical orbit, the fact that it was significantly smaller than Sirius A, but that it weighed much, much, more and also the presence of a third star, Sirius C, which was confirmed by astronomers in 1995. According to Laird Scranton, their Nommo iconography also shows a surprisingly sophisticated understanding of the operation of chromosomes inside a cell. It is indeed unlikely that physical extraterrestrials would land in West Africa, pointlessly explain some information about the mass of their home star system, impart some information about biology the Dogon couldn&#x2019;t possibly use and then fly back home.</p>
<a id="page_269"></a>
<p class="indent">A psychic contact scenario is a better match for the presence of redundant complexity in the Dogon stories of Sirius. Any magician worth her salt has experienced the phenomenon of receiving more information than required from the spirit world. It is interesting, yes. But ultimately pointless.</p>
<p class="indent">This same mechanism of action provides more parsimonious explanations for any number of anomalous data points, such as the famous Piri Reis map. Whilst the map does appear to show a superficial resemblance to the coastline of Antarctica without ice, which do you think is more likely: an accurate description of a coastline surviving down more than a million years or some sort of early navigational variant of remote viewing? (You don&#x2019;t think the best ancient navigators were clairvoyant? I put it to you that someone either saw or was shown that coastline.) Further examples, relevant to some of the areas covered in this book, appear to bear out the &#x2018;redundant complexity as evidence of contact with an external agency&#x2019; scenario.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>Nabta Playa</b></p>
<p class="indent">The pastoral tribes of Neolithic East Africa are not currently known to have been an intergalactic people. When Thomas Brophy &#x2013; who, I remind you, is an actual rocket scientist &#x2013; was examining the outlying stones around the calendar circle, he noted that their distance from the circle scale to represent the actual distance of the stars away from earth. Even more impressively, those aligned to Vega &#x2013; used as a marker star to corroborate the various alignments &#x2013; scale to represent the radial velocity of the stars they represent.</p>
<p class="indent">Brophy notes, in regards to the carved bedrock underneath the calendar circle, which had the cow stone buried between it and the surface, &#x2018;[a]stonishing as it may be, the bedrock sculpture underneath Complex Structure A&#x2019; at Nabta Playa appears to be an accurate depiction of our Milky Way galaxy, as it was oriented astronomically at a specific time: vernal equinox heliacal rising of the Galactic Center in 17,700 <small>BC</small>.&#x2019; The cow stone itself was located above the location of our sun on the &#x2018;galaxy map&#x2019; beneath it.</p>
<p class="indent">The Nabta Playa results are probably the most interesting on a personal level as they strike me as the best match for an hypothesised Laurasian &#x2018;stellar immortality technology&#x2019; or a sort of &#x2018;stone age hermetics.&#x2019; Not only was Complex Structure A a ground map of Orion, calibrated to both Sirius and the Imperishable Stars, it demonstrates a scaling of the &#x2018;as above, so below&#x2019; concept to a genuinely galactic level that is simply quite beyond the skills of Neolithic cowherds. One wonders who gave them the idea.</p>
<a id="page_270"></a>
<p class="h3"><b>The Vedas</b></p>
<p class="indent">As with Nabta Playa, we have explored some of the Vedic mathematics that, while hugely impressive, are not quite beyond the astronomical skills of the people who sung them. There are other elements which suggest someone was on the other end of the line, so to speak:</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> Not only do the Vedas state that the sun does not move, it is also described as an ordinary star &#x2018;in the daytime.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> The Vedas demonstrate an awareness that not all the stars are the same distance from earth.</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> The Vishnu Purana describes earth&#x2019;s tidal action: &#x2018;in all the oceans the water remains at all times the same in quantity and never increases or diminishes; but like the water in a cauldron, which in consequence of its combination with heat, expands, so the waters of the ocean swell with the increase of the moon. The waters, although really neither more nor less, dilate or contract as the moon increases or wanes in the light and dark fortnights.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="bull"><span class="bull">&#x2022;</span> Both the Rig Veda and the Yajur Veda describe sun spots.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>THE NUIT FORMULA</b></p>
<p class="indent">Why Nuit? Yes, she appears on the Stele of Revealing so Crowley should probably have expected her to show up, but as answers go it still seems faintly unsatisfying. Nuit is an odd goddess. She has very few temples but is commonly depicted in others, particularly those of her children, Osiris and Isis. She is also regularly depicted inside coffins and tombs. With the rise of Horus she becomes, not the mother of the gods, but the grandmother of the gods &#x2013; a further step removed from agency in the day-to-day lives of Egyptians, but, like a true grandmother, still, affectionately &#x2018;there.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="indent">In many ways she is only half goddess and half &#x2018;cosmic formula.&#x2019; She is a perhaps a step too far &#x2018;up&#x2019; the cosmological description of the universe to be quite as approachable to humans as are her children. Nuit is the personification of the entire underworld that is also the night sky, a place we must pass through to become immortal. She &#x2013; as the sum total of all the stars &#x2013; is our origin and our home. Nuit is the last vestiges of the cosmos&#x2019;s personality before it dissolves into a benign, undifferentiated pantheism. Mankind&#x2019;s emergence into full consciousness is intimately related to the stars, and recognising and reactivating that awareness is what the stellar goddess represents. When you speak of her you are speaking of the entire range of cosmic and spirit phenomena.</p>
<p class="indent">Nuit is how you explain a hologram to a Neanderthal.</p>
<a id="page_271"></a>
<p class="h3"><b>WHO OWNS THESE STORIES?</b></p>
<p class="indent">How outrageous of me to get so far into a book of this nature without checking my privilege. To speak of New Guineans without having brown skin, to speak of biology without having a diploma and just simply to speak about more than one thing. Surely the world has seen enough universalisms issuing from London to last the rest of the Kali Yuga?</p>
<p class="indent">Well, comparison is not the same thing as universalism. Indeed, Wendy Doniger says that &#x2018;eclecticism is essential to the comparatist&#x2019;s methodology.&#x2019; When it comes to magic, I would go even further. Magicians are not simply opportunistic comparativists, magicians are thieves. In <i>The Dark Lord</i>, Peter Levenda echoes the sentiment.</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="quote">Modern western magic is a refusal to accept the position of post-modernism that each culture is unique and owes nothing to other cultures, even when similar ideas, symbols and rituals are involved &#x2026; [T]he symbol systems of different cultures may reveal superficial differences as a result of geography, history and even religion, but the states of consciousness represented by these symbols are identical or nearly so. There would be no syncretic religions if this were not the case &#x2026;</p>
<p class="space"/>
<p class="indent">Not only is it self-evident from the perspective of personal magical experiences, there is also good scientific evidence demonstrating commonalities of consciousness experiences across time and space. The occultist is aware that the world&#x2019;s storehouse of magic techniques is a great soup of runes. His kleptomania arises from his understanding that there is probably always a better spoonful on the other side of the bowl and he is perfectly prepared to risk death by poisoning to find out if it is so. It is thanks to this fear of missing out that we have the Greek Magical Papyri.</p>
<p class="indent">So who owns these individual stories? If one is not retelling them, they belong to the world. If one is retelling them, they belong to the culture in which one finds them. But your microscope and your telescope always belong to you.</p>
<p class="indent">As for western magic&#x2019;s wider story? In light of the last few decades of scientific and archaeological advancement it is safe to say we are at the very beginning of a new retelling. This is no time for solipsism. You don&#x2019;t drink the water if you don&#x2019;t dig the well. The restoration of context is the goal, not the acquisition of the next shiny new thing.</p>
<p class="indent">What do we do with this restored context? What we have always done. Go, burn a little incense, out under the Stars.</p>
<p class="indent">Welcome to the neighbourhood.</p>
<a id="page_272"></a>
</div>
</body>
</html>