<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Star.Ships</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<a id="page_273"></a>
<p class="bmtitle"><b>BIBLIOGRAPHY</b></p>
<p class="biblio">Abi-Rached, Laurent. &#x2018;The Shaping of Modern Human Immune Systems by Multiregional Admixture with Archaic Humans.&#x2019; <i>Science</i> Vol 334, No 6052. <a href="http://www.sciencemag.org/content/334/6052/89.short">http://www.sciencemag.org/content/334/6052/89.short</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Achenback, Joel. &#x2018;Scientists: Mysterious Kennewick Man looked Polynesian and came from far away.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.washingtonpost.com/national/health-science/scientists-mysterious-kennewick-man-looked-polynesian-and-came-from-far-away/2014/08/25/45411b2a-27b3-11e4-86ca-6f03cbd15c1a_story.html">http://www.washingtonpost.com/national/health-science/scientists-mysterious-kennewick-man-looked-polynesian-and-came-from-far-away/2014/08/25/45411b2a-27b3-11e4-86ca-6f03cbd15c1a_story.html</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Afonso, Alexandre. &#x2018;How Academia Resembles a Drug Gang.&#x2019; <a href="http://alexandreafonso.me/2013/11/21/how-academia-resembles-a-drug-gang/">http://alexandreafonso.me/2013/11/21/how-academia-resembles-a-drug-gang/</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Aldhouse-Green, Miranda &amp; Stephen Aldhouse-Green. <i>The Quest for the Shama</i>n. Thames &amp; Hudson. London. 2005.</p>
<p class="biblio">Alfonso-Goldfarb, A.M. &amp; Jubran, S.A.C. &#x2018;Listening to the Whispers of Matter Through Arabic Hermeticism: New Studies on the Book of the Treasure of Alexander.&#x2019; <i>Ambix</i> Vol. 55; No. 2. 2008. Black Bear Press Ltd. Cambridge. 2008.</p>
<p class="biblio">Allen, Thomas George. <i>Occurrences of Pyramid Texts with Cross Indexes of these and other Egyptian Mortuary</i> <i>Texts</i>. University of Chicago Press. Chicago. 1950.</p>
<p class="biblio">Ananthaswamy, Anil. &#x2018;World&#x2019;s Oldest Temple Built to Worship the Dog Star.&#x2019; <a href="https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg21929303.400-worlds-oldest-temple-built-to-worship-the-dog-star/">https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg21929303.400-worlds-oldest-temple-built-to-worship-the-dog-star/</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Araus, Jos&#x00E9; L. et al. &#x2018;Agronomic conditions and crop evolution in ancient Near East agriculture.&#x2019; Nature Communications, 2014; 5 DOI: 10.1038/ncomms4953. <a href="http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2014/05/140528104026.htm">http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2014/05/140528104026.htm</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Assmann, Jan. <i>Cultural Memory and Early Civilization</i>. Cambridge University Press. New York. 2011.</p>
<p class="biblio">Banning, E.B. &#x2018;So Fair a House: Gobekli Tepe and the Identification of Temples in the Pre-Pottery Neolithic of the Near East.&#x2019; <i>Current Anthropology</i>. Vol. 52; No. 5, 2011. University of Chicago Press.</p>
<p class="biblio">Bartlett, Xavier. &#x2018;The Concept of Civilisation.&#x2019; <i>New Dawn</i> Special Issue Vol. 8, No. 1. 2014.</p>
<p class="biblio">Bauval, Robert &amp; Ahmed Osman. <i>Breaking the Mirror of Heaven</i>. Bear &amp; Co. Rochester. 2012.</p>
<a id="page_274"></a>
<p class="biblio">Bauval, Robert &amp; Thomas Brophy PhD. <i>Black Genesis: The Prehistoric Origins of Ancient Egypt</i>. Bear &amp; Co. Rochester. 2011.</p>
<p class="biblio">Bauval, Robert &amp; Thomas Brophy PhD. <i>Imhotep the African: Architect of the Cosmos</i>. Disinformation Books. San Francisco. 2013.</p>
<p class="biblio">Bauval, Robert. <i>Secret Chamber Revisited</i>. Bear &amp; Co. Rochester. 2014.</p>
<p class="biblio">Bauval, Robert. <i>The Egypt Code</i>. Century Books. London. 2006.</p>
<p class="biblio">Bauval, Robert. &#x2018;The Great Pyramid&#x2019;s Missing Capstone: What Happened to it?&#x2019; <i>New Dawn</i> Special Issue Vol 8, No 6. 2014.</p>
<p class="biblio">Bawaya, Michael. &#x2018;Migration mystery: Who were the first Americans?&#x2019; <a href="https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg21729102.100-migration-mystery-who-were-the-first-americans/">https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg21729102.100-migration-mystery-who-were-the-first-americans/</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Belmonte, Juan Antonio and Mosalam Shaltout, foreword by Zahi Hawass. <i>In Search of Cosmic Order:</i> <i>Selected Essays on Egyptian Archaeoastronom</i>y. Supreme Council of Antiquities Press. Cairo. 2009.</p>
<p class="biblio">Belmonte, Juan Antonio et al. &#x2018;Light and Shadows over Petra: Astronomy and Landscape in Nabataean Lands.&#x2019; <i>Nexus Network Journal</i> 15 (3): 487-501, Dec 2013. <a href="http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs00004-013-0164-6">http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs00004-013-0164-6</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Belmonte, Juan Antonio et al. &#x2018;On the Orientation of Ancient Egyptian Temples: (5) Testing the Theory in Middle Egypt and Sudan.&#x2019; <a href="http://digital.csic.es/bitstream/10261/80000/1/2010-Belmonte%20et%20al.%20-%202010%20-%20On%20the%20orientation%20of%20ancient%20Egyptian%20temples%20(5)%20testing%20the%20theory%20in%20Middle%20Egypt%20and%20Sudan.pdf">http://digital.csic.es/bitstream/10261/80000/1/2010-Belmonte%20et%20al.%20-%202010%20-%20On%20the%20orientation%20of%20ancient%20Egyptian%20temples%20(5)%20testing%20the%20theory%20in%20Middle%20Egypt%20and%20Sudan.pdf</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Belmonte, Juan Antonio. &#x2018;Archaeoastronomy: Archaeology, Topography and Celestial Landscape &#x2013; from the Nile to Rapa Nui.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.sea-astronomia.es/drupal/sites/default/files/archivos/proceedings9/DIVULGACION/INVITADAS/belmontej/F-belmonteja.pdf">http://www.sea-astronomia.es/drupal/sites/default/files/archivos/proceedings9/DIVULGACION/INVITADAS/belmontej/F-belmonteja.pdf</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Best, Elsdon. &#x2018;Maori Personifications: Anthropogeny, Solar Myths and Phallic Symbolism: As Exemplified in the Demiurgic Concepts of Tane and Tiki.&#x2019; <i>The Journal of the Polynesian Society</i>. <a href="http://www.jps.auckland.ac.nz/document/?wid=1219">http://www.jps.auckland.ac.nz/document/?wid=1219</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Best, Elsdon. &#x2018;Maori Religion and Mythology: The Poutiriao, or Tutelary Beings.&#x2019; <a href="http://nzetc.victoria.ac.nz/tm/scholarly/tei-Bes01Reli-t1-body-d3-d11.html">http://nzetc.victoria.ac.nz/tm/scholarly/tei-Bes01Reli-t1-body-d3-d11.html</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Betz, Hans Dieter. <i>The Greek Magical Papyri in Translation</i>. University of Chicago Press. London. 1996.</p>
<p class="biblio">Biagi, Paolo. &#x2018;The shell-middens of the Arabian Sea and Gulf: Maritime connections in the seventh millennium BP?&#x2019; <a href="http://a.harappa.com/sites/g/files/g65461/f/shell-middens-arabian-sea.pdf">http://a.harappa.com/sites/g/files/g65461/f/shell-middens-arabian-sea.pdf</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Billing, N. &amp; Hawass, Z. <i>Text and Tomb: Some Spatial Properties of Nut in the Pyramid Texts</i>. International Congress of Egyptologists: Egyptology at the Dawn of the Twenty-First Century; Cairo, 2000. American University in Cairo Press. Cairo. 2003.</p>
<p class="biblio">Blaszczak-Boxe, Agata. &#x2018;Prehistoric High Times: Early Humans Used Magic Mushrooms, Opium.&#x2019;
<a id="page_275"></a>
<a href="http://www.livescience.com/49666-prehistoric-humans-psychoactive-drugs.html">http://www.livescience.com/49666-prehistoric-humans-psychoactive-drugs.html</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Brahic, Catherine. &#x2018;Human exodus may have reached China 100,000 years ago.&#x2019; <a href="https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg22329813.000-human-exodus-may-have-reached-china-100000-years-ago">https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg22329813.000-human-exodus-may-have-reached-china-100000-years-ago</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Brennan, J. H. <i>Whisperers: The Secret History of the World</i>. Overlook Duckworth. London. 2013.</p>
<p class="biblio">Brier, Bob and Jean-Pierre Houdin. <i>The Secret of the Great Pyramid</i>. Collins. London. 2008.</p>
<p class="biblio">Brophy PhD, Thomas G. <i>The Origin Map: Discovery of a Prehistoric, Megalithic, Astrophysical Map and Sculpture of the Universe</i>. Writers Club Press. London. 2002.</p>
<p class="biblio">Brophy PhD, Thomas. &#x2018;Imhotep the African: Architect of the Cosmos.&#x2019; <i>New Dawn</i> Special Issue Vol. 8, No. 1. 2014.</p>
<p class="biblio">Burnham, D. &#x2018;Explorations into the Alchemical Idiom of the Pyramid Texts.&#x2019; <i>Discussions in Egyptology</i>. NUM 60, 2004. DE Publications. Oxford. 2004</p>
<p class="biblio">Carter, Tristan. &#x2018;The Contribution of Obsidian Characterization Studies to Early Prehistoric Archaeology.&#x2019; <a href="http://maxlab.ca/Carter-%20contribution%20of%20obsidian%20characterization.pdf">http://maxlab.ca/Carter-%20contribution%20of%20obsidian%20characterization.pdf</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Carville, D. J. &#x2018;Schwaller de Lubicz and the Symbolist Key to Egypt.&#x2019; <i>New Dawn</i> Special Issue Vol. 8, No. 6. 2014.</p>
<p class="biblio">Casey, Michael. &#x2018;When did dogs become man&#x2019;s best friend?&#x2019; <a href="http://www.cbsnews.com/news/when-did-dogs-become-mans-best-friend/">http://www.cbsnews.com/news/when-did-dogs-become-mans-best-friend/</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">&#x00C7;elik, Bahattin. &#x2018;Karahan Tepe: A New Cultural Centre in the Urfa area in Turkey.&#x2019; <i>Documenta Praehistorica</i> XXXVIII. 2011. <a href="http://arheologija.ff.uni-lj.si/documenta/pdf38/38_19.pdf">http://arheologija.ff.uni-lj.si/documenta/pdf38/38_19.pdf</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Cervicek, P. &#x2018;Rock art and the Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts.&#x2019; Sahara / Centro studi Luigi Negro. Issue 10, 1998, 110&#x2013;111. PYRAMIDS SNC. 1998.</p>
<p class="biblio">Chang, Chun-Hsiang et al. &#x2018;The first archaic homo from Taiwan.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.nature.com/ncomms/2015/150127/ncomms7037/pdf/ncomms7037.pdf">http://www.nature.com/ncomms/2015/150127/ncomms7037/pdf/ncomms7037.pdf</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Chen, Stephen. &#x2018;Made in China &#x2013; 3,700 years ago: scientists reveal &#x201C;hi-tech&#x201D; celadon pottery production site.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.scmp.com/news/china/article/1651923/made-china-3700-years-ago-scientists-reveal-hi-tech-celadon-pottery">http://www.scmp.com/news/china/article/1651923/made-china-3700-years-ago-scientists-reveal-hi-tech-celadon-pottery</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Choi, Charles Q. &#x2018;Ancient Human Fossil Could Be New Primitive Species.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.livescience.com/49588-ancient-human-fossil-primitive-species.html">http://www.livescience.com/49588-ancient-human-fossil-primitive-species.html</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Churton, Tobias. <i>Aleister Crowley: The Biography</i>. Watkins Publishing. London. 2011.</p>
<p class="biblio">Clark, Laura. &#x2018;Did Fishermen Find Evidence of an Unknown Group of Primitive Humans?&#x2019; <a href="http://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/did-fishermen-find-evidence-unknown-group-primitive-humans-180954054">http://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/did-fishermen-find-evidence-unknown-group-primitive-humans-180954054</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Clarke, Ardy Sixkiller. <i>Sky People: Untold Stories of Alien Encounters in Mesoamerica</i>. New Page Books. Pompton Plains. 2015.</p>
<a id="page_276"></a>
<p class="biblio">Coghlan, Andy. &#x2018;Island-hopping odyssey brought civilisation to Europe.&#x2019; <a href="https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn25695-island-hopping-odyssey-brought-civilisation-to-europe/">https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn25695-island-hopping-odyssey-brought-civilisation-to-europe/</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Cohen, Julie. &#x2018;Study examines 13,000-year-old nanodiamonds from multiple locations across three continents.&#x2019; <a href="http://phys.org/news/2014-08-year-old-nanodiamonds-multiple-continents.html">http://phys.org/news/2014-08-year-old-nanodiamonds-multiple-continents.html</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Conman, Joanne. <i>Ancient Egyptian Sky Lore</i>. Decan Wisdom Books. 2013.</p>
<p class="biblio">Copenhaver, Brian P. <i>Hermetica</i>. Cambridge University Press. New York. 1992.</p>
<p class="biblio">Coppens, Philip. <i>The Canopus Revelation</i>. Frontier Publishing. Enkhuizen. 2004.</p>
<p class="biblio">Counts, Derek B. &amp; Bettina Arnold (editors). <i>The Master of Animals in Old World Iconography</i>. Archaeo-lingua Foundation. Budapest. 2010.</p>
<p class="biblio">Craig, Oliver. &#x2018;Earliest Evidence for the Use of Pottery.&#x2019; <i>Nature</i>. 2013.</p>
<p class="biblio">Cremo, Michael A. <i>The Forbidden Archaeologist</i>. Torchlight Publishing Inc. 2011. (Kindle edition.)</p>
<p class="biblio">Cronin, Frances. &#x2018;Egyptian pyramids found by infra-red satellite images.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-13522957">http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-13522957</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Croucher, Karina. <i>Death and Dying in the Neolithic Near East</i>. Oxford University Press. Oxford. 2012.</p>
<p class="biblio">Crowley, Aleister. <i>The Law is for All</i>. (editors: Louis Wilkinson &amp; Hymenaeus Beta.) New Falcon. Tempe. 1996.</p>
<p class="biblio">Dalley, Stephanie. <i>Myths from Mesopotamia: Creation, the Flood, Gilgamesh, and Others</i>. Oxford University Press. Oxford. 2008.</p>
<p class="biblio">Davidovits, Joseph. &#x2018;Paleomagnetism study supports Pyramid man-made stone.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.davidovits.info/paleomagnetism-study-supports-pyramid-man-made-stone/">http://www.davidovits.info/paleomagnetism-study-supports-pyramid-man-made-stone/</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Davidovits, Joseph. <i>Why the Pharaohs Built the Pyramids with Fake Stones</i>. Institut G&#x00E9;opolym&#x00E8;re. Saint-Quentin. 2009.</p>
<p class="biblio">Davidson, Iain and David Andrew Roberts. &#x2018;14,000 <small>BC</small>: On being alone &#x2013; the isolation of the Tasmanians.&#x2019; <a href="https://www.academia.edu/273234/14_000._On_being_alone_the_isolation_of_the_Tasmanian">https://www.academia.edu/273234/14_000._On_being_alone_the_isolation_of_the_Tasmanian</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">De Trafford, A. Goyon, J.C. Cardin, C. &#x2018;The Pyramid Texts: A Contextual Approach.&#x2019; <i>ORIENTALIA LOVANIENSIA ANALECTA</i>. International congress of Egyptologists; Grenoble, France, 2004; Sep, 2007. Peeters. Louvain. 2006 &#x2013; 2007.</p>
<p class="biblio">Denham, Tim. &#x2018;Early Agriculture and Plant Domestication in New Guinea and Island Southeast Asia.&#x2019; <i>Current Anthropology</i>. Vol 52, No S4. University of Chicago Press. <a href="http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/658682">http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/658682</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Devereux, Paul. Acoustic Archaeology: Presented to Scientific &amp; Medical Network, London, 2008. <a href="http://www.uwhg.org.uk/reports/other_meetings/acustic_arch/acustic_arch.html">http://www.uwhg.org.uk/reports/other_meetings/acustic_arch/acustic_arch.html</a> Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Dietrich, Oliver et al. &#x2018;The role of cult and feasting in the emergence of Neolithic communities. New
<a id="page_277"></a>
evidence from Gobekli Tepe, south-eastern Turkey.&#x2019; <i>Antiquity</i> Vol. 86; No. 333. 2012.</p>
<p class="biblio">Dietrich, Oliver. &#x2018;G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe: A Stone Age Ritual Center in Southeastern Turkey.&#x2019; <i>Actual Archaeology Magazine</i>. Summer 2012 Issue 02. 2012.</p>
<p class="biblio">Dietrich, Oliver. &#x2018;G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe: Agriculture and Domestication.&#x2019; <a href="https://www.academia.edu/6100898/G%C3%B6bekli_Tepe_Agriculture_and_Domestication">https://www.academia.edu/6100898/G%C3%B6bekli_Tepe_Agriculture_and_Domestication</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Dietrich, Oliver. &#x2018;G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe. Preliminary Report on the 2012 and 2013 Seasons.&#x2019; <i>Neo-Lithics</i> 1/14: The Newsletter of Southwest Asian Neolithic Research. 2014.</p>
<p class="biblio">Ding, Qiliang et al. &#x2018;Neanderthal Introgression at Chromosome 3p21.31 Was Under Positive Natural Selection in East Asians.&#x2019; <i>Oxford Journal of Molecular Biology and Evolution</i>. Vol. 31, Issue 3.</p>
<p class="biblio">Diop, Cheikh Anta et al. <i>The Peopling of Ancient Egypt</i>. Karnak House. London. 1997.</p>
<p class="biblio">Donegan, John. &#x2018;Explainer: Who were the first Australians?&#x2019; <a href="http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-06-29/explainer-who-were-the-first-australians/6576364">http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-06-29/explainer-who-were-the-first-australians/6576364</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Doniger, Wendy. <i>The Implied Spider: Politics &amp; Theology in Myth</i>. Columbia University Press. New York. 1998.</p>
<p class="biblio">Ducheyne, S. &#x2018;The Secret History of Hermes: Hermeticism from Ancient Times to Modern Times.&#x2019; <i>Annals of Science: a quarterly review of the history of science since the Renaissance</i>. Vol. 66; No. 2, 2009. Taylor &amp; Francis. London. 2009</p>
<p class="biblio">Ducklau, Heinz. &#x2018;Modern Humans More Neanderthal than Once Thought, Studies Suggest.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.cbsnews.com/news/modern-humans-more-neanderthal-than-once-thought-studies-suggest/">http://www.cbsnews.com/news/modern-humans-more-neanderthal-than-once-thought-studies-suggest/</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Edwards, Edmundo &amp; Alexandra Edwards. &#x2018;Flag 83 Expedition Report.&#x2019; <i>Rapanui Archaeoastronomy &amp; Ethnoastronomy</i>. <a href="http://www.pacificislandsresearchinstitute.org/Flag_83_Report.pdf">http://www.pacificislandsresearchinstitute.org/Flag_83_Report.pdf</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Edwards, Edmundo. &#x2018;Megalithic Astronomy of Easter Island: A Reassessment.&#x2019; <i>Journal for the History of Astronomy</i>. Vol. 35, Part 4, No 121. 2004.</p>
<p class="biblio">Edwards, I. E. S. <i>The Pyramids of Egypt</i>. Penguin Books. London. 1961. (Revised edition.)</p>
<p class="biblio">Eliade, Mircea. <i>The Sacred and the Profane: The Nature of Religion</i>. Harvest Books. New York. 1959.</p>
<p class="biblio">Engelking, Carl. &#x2018;4,600-Year-Old Pyramid Uncovered in Southern Egypt.&#x2019;</p>
<p class="biblio">Erdal, Yilmaz Selim. &#x2018;Bone or Flesh: Defleshing and post-depositional treatments at K&#x00F6;rtik Tepe (Southeastern Anatolia, PPNA Period).&#x2019; <a href="https://www.academia.edu/8530779/Bone_or_Flesh_Defleshing_and_Post-Depositional_Treatments_at_K%C3%B6rtik_Tepe_Southeastern_Anatolia_PPNA_Period_">https://www.academia.edu/8530779/Bone_or_Flesh_Defleshing_and_Post-Depositional_Treatments_at_K%C3%B6rtik_Tepe_Southeastern_Anatolia_PPNA_Period_</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Faulkner, R. O. <i>The Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts</i>. Digireads Publishing. Stilwell. 2007.</p>
<p class="biblio">Finkel, Irving. <i>The Ark Before Noah: Decoding the Story of the Flood</i>. Hodder &amp; Stoughton. London. 2014.</p>
<p class="biblio">Fox, R.L. et al. &#x2018;Harran, the Sabians and the late Platonist &#x201C;Movers.&#x201D;&#x2019; <i>Conference in honour of Peter Brown; The Philosopher and Society in late antiquity: Essays in honour of Peter Brown</i>. 2005. Classical Press of Wales. Swansea. 2005.</p>
<a id="page_278"></a>
<p class="biblio">Garfinkel, Yosef. <i>Dancing at the Dawn of Agriculture</i>. University of Texas Press. Austin. 2003.</p>
<p class="biblio">Gatti, Hilary. <i>Essays on Giordano Bruno</i>. Princeton University Press. Princeton. 2011.</p>
<p class="biblio">Gennaro, Alfredo. &#x2018;Giza Pyramids Today. Figures Against Assumptions.&#x2019; <i>ORIENTALIA LOVANIENSIA ANALECTA</i>. International congress of Egyptologists; Grenoble, France, 2004; Sep, 2007. Peeters. Louvain. 2006 &#x2013; 2007.</p>
<p class="biblio">Gigal, Antoine. &#x2018;How Did This Civilisation Begin? Egypt Before the Pharaohs.&#x2019; <i>New Dawn</i> Special Issue Vol. 8, No. 6. 2014.</p>
<p class="biblio">Girling, Richard. &#x2018;King Tut tut tut.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/style/article133853.ece">http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/style/article133853.ece</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Glucklich, Ariel. <i>The Strides of Vishnu</i>. Oxford University Press. Oxford. 2008.</p>
<p class="biblio">Gough, Myles. &#x2018;Aboriginal legends reveal ancient secrets to science.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-australia-32701311">http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-australia-32701311</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Greene, Tamara M. <i>The City of the Moon God: Religious Traditions of Harran</i>. Brill. Leiden. 1992.</p>
<p class="biblio">Greer, John Michael and Christopher Warnock. <i>The Picatrix</i>. Adocentyn Press. 2010.</p>
<p class="biblio">Griffiths, John Gwyn. <i>The Origins of Osiris and His Cult</i>. Brill. Leiden. 1980.</p>
<p class="biblio">Grof, Stanislav. <i>When the Impossible Happens</i>. Sounds True Inc. Boulder. 2006.</p>
<p class="biblio">Guerra-Doce, Elisa. &#x2018;The Origins of Inebriation: Archaeological Evidence of the Consumption of Fermented Beverages and Drugs in Prehistoric Eurasia.&#x2019; <i>Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory</i>. <a href="http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10816-014-9205-z#">http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10816-014-9205-z#</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Gunduz, Sinasi. <i>The origins and early history of the Mandaeans and their relation to the Sabians of the Qur&#x2019;an and to the Harranians</i>. (Thesis.) University of Manchester. 1991.</p>
<p class="biblio">Guzm&#x00E1;n, Gast&#x00F3;n. &#x2018;A Worldwide Geographical Distribution of the Neurotropic Fungi: An Analysis and Discussion.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.museocivico.rovereto.tn.it/UploadDocs/104_art09-Guzman%20">http://www.museocivico.rovereto.tn.it/UploadDocs/104_art09-Guzman%20</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Gy&#x0151;z&#x0151; V&#x00F6;r&#x00F6;s. &#x2018;Preliminary Report of the Excavations at Thoth Hill, Thebes. The Temple of Montuhotep Sankhkara (Season 1995 &#x2013; 1996).&#x2019; <i>Mitteilungen des Deutschen Arch&#x00E4;ologischen Instituts</i>, Abteilung Kairo. Vol. 53, 1997. Philipp von Zabern. Mainz. 1997.</p>
<p class="biblio">Gy&#x0151;z&#x0151; V&#x00F6;r&#x00F6;s &amp; Hawass, Z. &#x2018;The Ancient Nest of Horus above Thebes: Hungarian Excavations on Thoth Hill at the Temple of King Sankhkare Montuhotep (1995 &#x2013; 1998).&#x2019; <i>International Congress of Egyptologists; Egyptology at the Dawn of the Twenty-first Century</i>; Cairo, 2000. American University in Cairo Press. Cairo. 2003.</p>
<p class="biblio">Gy&#x0151;z&#x0151; V&#x00F6;r&#x00F6;s (trans. David Robert Evans). <i>Egyptian Temple Architecture: 100 Years of Hungarian Excavations in Egypt, 1907-2007</i>. Kairosz Press. Budapest. 2007.</p>
<p class="biblio">Hamacher, Duane. &#x2018;A shark in the stars: astronomy and culture in the Torres Strait.&#x2019; <a href="https://www.academia.edu/9325566/A_shark_in_the_stars_astronomy_and_culture_in_the_Torres_Strait">https://www.academia.edu/9325566/A_shark_in_the_stars_astronomy_and_culture_in_the_Torres_Strait</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Hamacher, Duane. &#x2018;Aboriginal Astronomical traditions from Ooldea, South Australia, Part 1: Nyeeruna and the &#x201C;Orion Story.&#x201D;&#x2019; <a href="https://www.academia.edu/6774066/Aboriginal_Astronomical_traditions_from_Ooldea_South_Australia_Part_1_Nyeeruna_and_the_Orion_Story_">https://www.academia.edu/6774066/Aboriginal_Astronomical_traditions_from_Ooldea_South_Australia_Part_1_Nyeeruna_and_the_Orion_Story_</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<a id="page_279"></a>
<p class="biblio">Hamacher, Duane. &#x2018;On the Astronomical Knowledge and Traditions of Aboriginal Australians.&#x2019; <a href="https://www.academia.edu/1905624/On_the_Astronomical_Knowledge_and_Traditions_of_Aboriginal_Australians">https://www.academia.edu/1905624/On_the_Astronomical_Knowledge_and_Traditions_of_Aboriginal_Australians</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Hamacher, Duane. &#x2018;Stories from the Sky: Astronomy in Indigenous Knowledge.&#x2019; <a href="http://aboriginal-astronomy.blogspot.co.uk/2014/12/stories-from-sky-astronomy-in.html">http://aboriginal-astronomy.blogspot.co.uk/2014/12/stories-from-sky-astronomy-in.html</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Hamacher, Duane. &#x2018;Stories from the Sky: Astronomy in Indigenous Knowledge.&#x2019; <a href="https://www.academia.edu/9621614/Stories_from_the_Sky_Astronomy_in_Indigenous_Knowledge">https://www.academia.edu/9621614/Stories_from_the_Sky_Astronomy_in_Indigenous_Knowledge</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Hancock, Graham. <i>Supernatural</i>. Century. London. 2005.</p>
<p class="biblio">Hancock, Graham. <i>Underworld: Flooded Kingdoms of the Ice Age</i>. Penguin Books. London. 2003.</p>
<p class="biblio">Hanegraaff, Wouter J. and Roelof van den Broek (editors). <i>Gnosis and Hermeticism from Antiquity to Modern Times</i>. University of New York Press. Albany. 1998.</p>
<p class="biblio">Hays, Brooks. &#x2018;Does the peer review process stifle scientific innovation?&#x2019; <a href="http://www.upi.com/Science_News/2014/12/23/Does-the-peer-review-process-stifle-scientific-innovation/5521419367701/">http://www.upi.com/Science_News/2014/12/23/Does-the-peer-review-process-stifle-scientific-innovation/5521419367701/</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Hays, Harold M. <i>The Organization of the Pyramid Texts: Typology and Disposition</i>. Brill. Leiden. 2012.</p>
<p class="biblio">Hellum, J. Knoblauch, C.M. Gill, J.C. &#x2018;The Use of Myth in the Pyramid Texts.&#x2019; BAR international series. Australasian Conference for Young Egyptologists; Egyptology in Australia and New Zealand 2009; Melbourne, Vic, 2009, 2012. Archaeopress. Oxford. 2012.</p>
<p class="biblio">Hendrickx, Stan et al. &#x2018;The Earliest Representations of Royal Power in Egypt: The Rock Drawings of Nag el-Hamdulab (Aswan).&#x2019; <i>Antiquity</i> 86. Antiquity Publications Ltd. 2012.</p>
<p class="biblio"><i>Heritage Daily</i>. &#x2018;Evidence of Domestic Cereal Grains in Sudan as Early as 7,000 Years Ago.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.heritagedaily.com/2014/11/evidence-of-domestic-cereals-in-sudan-as-early-as-7000-years-ago/105714">http://www.heritagedaily.com/2014/11/evidence-of-domestic-cereals-in-sudan-as-early-as-7000-years-ago/105714</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Holloway, April. &#x2018;Entire Neanderthal genome finally mapped &#x2013; with amazing results.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.ancient-origins.net/news-evolution-human-origins/entire-neanderthal-genome-finally-mapped-amazing-results-001138">http://www.ancient-origins.net/news-evolution-human-origins/entire-neanderthal-genome-finally-mapped-amazing-results-001138</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015. <a href="http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/d-brief/2014/02/04/4600-year-old-pyramid-uncovered-in-southern-egypt">http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/d-brief/2014/02/04/4600-year-old-pyramid-uncovered-in-southern-egypt</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015. <a href="http://mbe.oxfordjournals.org/content/31/3/683">http://mbe.oxfordjournals.org/content/31/3/683</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015. <a href="http://pvs.kcc.hawaii.edu/ike/hookele/hawaiian_star_lines.html">http://pvs.kcc.hawaii.edu/ike/hookele/hawaiian_star_lines.html</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015. <a href="http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v496/n7445/full/nature12109.html">http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v496/n7445/full/nature12109.html</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Hynek, J. Allen. <i>The UFO Experience: A Scientific Enquiry</i>. Corgi Books. London. 1974.</p>
<p class="biblio">Izady, Mehrdad R. <i>The Kurds: A Concise Handbook</i>. Crane Russak. London. 1992.</p>
<a id="page_280"></a>
<p class="biblio">Jakarta Post Travel. &#x2018;A new archaeological discovery in Gunung Padang may redefine what we know about Indonesia.&#x2019; <a href="https://sg.news.yahoo.com/archaeological-discovery-gunung-padang-may-redefine-know-indonesia-170000648.html">https://sg.news.yahoo.com/archaeological-discovery-gunung-padang-may-redefine-know-indonesia-170000648.html</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Jarus, Owen. &#x2018;&#x201C;World&#x2019;s Oldest Temple&#x201D; May Have Been Cosmopolitan Center.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.livescience.com/19085-world-oldest-temple-tools-pilgrimage.html">http://www.livescience.com/19085-world-oldest-temple-tools-pilgrimage.html</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Jarus, Owen. &#x2018;6,000-Year-Old Temple with Possible Sacrificial Altars Discovered.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.livescience.com/48352-prehistoric-ukraine-temple-discovered.html">http://www.livescience.com/48352-prehistoric-ukraine-temple-discovered.html</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Jarus, Owen. &#x2018;Ruins of Bustling Port Unearthed at Egypt&#x2019;s Giza Pyramids.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.livescience.com/42902-giza-pyramids-port-discovered.html">http://www.livescience.com/42902-giza-pyramids-port-discovered.html</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Keel, John A. <i>Our Haunted Planet</i>. Bounty Books. London. 2005.</p>
<p class="biblio">Knappert, Jan. <i>Pacific Mythology: An Encyclopedia of Myth and Legend</i>. Aquarian Press. London. 1992.</p>
<p class="biblio">Knight, Christopher &amp; Alan Butler. <i>Before the Pyramids</i>. Watkins Publishing. London. 2009.</p>
<p class="biblio">Kurth, Dieter. <i>The Temple of Edfu</i>. American University in Cairo Press. Cairo. 2004.</p>
<p class="biblio">Lachman, Gary. <i>The Quest for Hermes Trismegistus</i>. Floris Books. 2011. (Kindle edition.)</p>
<p class="biblio">Leeming, David. <i>The Oxford Companion to World Mythology</i>. Oxford University Press. Oxford. 2005.</p>
<p class="biblio">Levenda, Peter. <i>The Dark Lord</i>. Ibis Press. Lake Worth. 2013.</p>
<p class="biblio">Lewis-Williams, David &amp; Sam Challis. <i>Deciphering Ancient Minds</i>. Thames &amp; Hudson. London. 2011.</p>
<p class="biblio">Lieff-Benderly, Beryl. &#x2018;An Academic Cartel?&#x2019; <a href="http://sciencecareers.sciencemag.org/career_magazine/previous_issues/articles/2013_11_26/caredit.a1300260">http://sciencecareers.sciencemag.org/career_magazine/previous_issues/articles/2013_11_26/caredit.a1300260</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Luckert, Karl W. <i>Stone Age Religion at G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe</i>. Triplehood. 2013.</p>
<p class="biblio">Lutz, Diana. &#x2018;Genetic study tackles mystery of slow plant domestications.&#x2019; <a href="https://news.wustl.edu/news/Pages/26750.aspx">https://news.wustl.edu/news/Pages/26750.aspx</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Lutz, Diana. &#x2018;More questions than answers as mystery of domestication deepens.&#x2019; <a href="https://news.wustl.edu/news/Pages/26815.aspx">https://news.wustl.edu/news/Pages/26815.aspx</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Lutz, Diana. &#x2018;The story of animal domestication retold.&#x2019; <a href="https://news.wustl.edu/news/Pages/26781.aspx">https://news.wustl.edu/news/Pages/26781.aspx</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Magli, Giulo. &#x2018;On the Possible Discovery of Precessional Effects in Ancient Astronomy.&#x2019; <a href="http://arxiv.org/pdf/physics/0407108.pdf">http://arxiv.org/pdf/physics/0407108.pdf</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Mahadevan, Iravatham. &#x2018;A Notes on the Muruku Sign of the Indus Script in light of the Mayiladuthurai Stone Axe Discovery.&#x2019; <a href="http://a.harappa.com/content/arrow/stone_celt_indus_signs.html">http://a.harappa.com/content/arrow/stone_celt_indus_signs.html</a>. Last accessed Sept 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Malville, J.M. et al. <i>Astronomy of Nabta Playa</i>. Ghana Eclipse Conference; African cultural astronomy: current archaeoastronomy and ethnoastronomy research in Africa; Cape Coast, Ghana. Springer. Berlin. 2006.</p>
<p class="biblio">Manansala, Paul Kekai. <i>Sailing the Black Current</i>. Self-published. 2007.</p>
<p class="biblio">Mann, Charles C. &#x2018;The Birth of Religion.&#x2019; <i>National Geographic Magazine</i>. <a href="http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/print/2011/06/gobekli-tepe/mann-text">http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/print/2011/06/gobekli-tepe/mann-text</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Maraqten, M. &amp; Abdallah, Y. &#x2018;A Recently Discovered Inscribed Sabean Bronze Plaque from Mahram
<a id="page_281"></a>
Bilqis near Marib, Yemen.&#x2019; <i>Journal of Near Eastern Studies</i>. Vol. 61, Part 1. 2002. University of Chicago Press. Chicago. 2002.</p>
<p class="biblio">Marlar, M.; Goyon, J.C.; Cardin, C. &#x2018;Excavations of the Temple of Osiris at Abydos Reported on behalf of the University of Pennsylvania Museum &#x2013; Yale University &#x2013; Institute of Fine Arts, New York University Expedition to Abydos.&#x2019; <i>ORIENTALIA LOVANIENSIA ANALECTA</i>. International congress of Egyptologists; Grenoble, France, 2004; Sep, 2007. Peeters. Louvain. 2006 &#x2013; 2007.</p>
<p class="biblio">McEvoy, Maria. &#x2018;Cold War satellites find lost cities in Middle East.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/10793066/Cold-War-satellites-find-lost-cities-in-Middle-East.html">http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/10793066/Cold-War-satellites-find-lost-cities-in-Middle-East.html</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Milic, Marina. &#x2018;The Consumption of Obsidian at Neolithic &#x00C7;atalh&#x00F6;y&#x00FC;k: A Long-Term Perspective.&#x2019; <a href="https://www.academia.edu/5389781/The_consumption_of_obsidian_at_Neolithic_%C3%87atalh%C3%B6y%C3%BCk_A_long-term_perspective">https://www.academia.edu/5389781/The_consumption_of_obsidian_at_Neolithic_%C3%87atalh%C3%B6y%C3%BCk_A_long-term_perspective</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Morgan, Mogg. <i>Tankhem: Seth &amp; Egyptian Magick</i>. Mandrake of Oxford. Oxford. 2005.</p>
<p class="biblio">Morgan, Stephen. &#x2018;40,000-year-old bracelet made by extinct human species found.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.digitaljournal.com/science/40-000-year-old-bracelet-from-extinct-human-species-discovered/article/432798#ixzz3ZeTMp6YA">http://www.digitaljournal.com/science/40-000-year-old-bracelet-from-extinct-human-species-discovered/article/432798#ixzz3ZeTMp6YA</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Murgano, R.; Goyon, J.C.; Cardin, C. &#x2018;The Sun and Stars Double Cult in the Old Kingdom.&#x2019; <i>ORIENTALIA LOVANIENSIA ANALECTA</i>. International congress of Egyptologists; Grenoble, France, 2004; Sep, 2007. Peeters. Louvain. 2006 &#x2013; 2007.</p>
<p class="biblio">Naydler, Jeremy. <i>Shamanic Wisdom in the Pyramid Texts</i>. Inner Traditions. Rochester. 2005.</p>
<p class="biblio">Nichols, Joanna. <i>Linguistic Diversity in Space and Time</i>. University of Chicago Press. London. 1992.</p>
<p class="biblio">Ogdon, J. R. &#x2018;Studies in Ancient Egyptian Magical Thought, VII. Pyramid Texts-Pepi 1, Passage A-S, South Wall, Line 9.&#x2019; <i>Discussions in Egyptology</i>. ISSU 50, 2001, 55&#x2013;62. 2001.</p>
<p class="biblio">Oppenheimer, Stephen. <i>Eden in the East: The Drowned Continent of Southeast Asia</i>. Phoenix. London. 1998.</p>
<p class="biblio">Orriols i Llonch, M. Goyon, J.C. Cardin, C. &#x2018;Divine Copulation in the Pyramid Texts. A Lexical and Cultural Approach.&#x2019; <i>ORIENTALIA LOVANIENSIA ANALECTA</i>. International congress of Egyptologists; Grenoble, France, 2004; Sep, 2007. Peeters. Louvain. 2006 &#x2013; 2007.</p>
<p class="biblio">Owen, Sri. <i>The Rice Book</i>. Frances Lincoln. London. 1993.</p>
<p class="biblio">PAP &#x2013; Science and Scholarship in Poland. &#x2018;70,000 year-old African settlement unearthed.&#x2019; <i>Past Horizons</i>. <a href="http://www.pasthorizonspr.com/index.php/archives/07/2014/70000-year-old-african-settlement-unearthed">http://www.pasthorizonspr.com/index.php/archives/07/2014/70000-year-old-african-settlement-unearthed</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Parpola, Asko. &#x2018;Beginnings of Indian Astronomy with Reference to a Parallel Development in China.&#x2019; <i>History of Science in South Asia</i> Vol. 1. 2013.</p>
<p class="biblio">Parsell, Diana. &#x2018;Monumental Shift.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/monumental-shift-160227897">http://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/monumental-shift-160227897</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Perkins, Sid. &#x2018;DNA study links indigenous Brazilians to Polynesians.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.nature.com/news/dna-study-links-indigenous-brazilians-to-polynesians-1.12710">http://www.nature.com/news/dna-study-links-indigenous-brazilians-to-polynesians-1.12710</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<a id="page_282"></a>
<p class="biblio">Peters, J. et al. &#x2018;Birds in the megalithic art of Pre-Pottery Neolithic Gobekli Tepe, Southeast Turkey.&#x2019; <i>DOCUMENTA ARCH&#x00C6;OBIOLOGI&#x00C6;</i>. International Council for Archaeozoology. Feathers, grit and symbolism: birds and humans in the ancient old and new worlds. Munich. 2004.</p>
<p class="biblio">Pingree, D. &#x2018;The Sabians of Harran and the Classical Tradition.&#x2019; <i>International Journal of the Classical</i> <i>Tradition</i>. Vol 9, Part 1, 2002. Transaction Publishers. Piscataway. 2002.</p>
<p class="biblio">Polynesian Voyaging Society. <i>Hawaiian Star Lines and Names for Stars</i>.</p>
<p class="biblio">Powell, Alvin. &#x2018;The Surprising Origins of Europeans.&#x2019; <a href="http://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2014/12/the-surprising-origins-of-europeans/">http://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2014/12/the-surprising-origins-of-europeans/</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Priyadarshi, Premendra. <i>In Quest of the Dates of the Vedas</i>. Partridge Publishing. 2014. Gurgaon. 2014.</p>
<p class="biblio">Pustovoytov, K. &#x2018;Soils and Soil Sediments at G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe, Southeastern Turkey: A Preliminary Report.&#x2019; <i>Geoarchaeology: An International Journal</i>. Vol. 21; No. 7. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd. London. 2006.</p>
<p class="biblio">Rajaram, N. S. &#x2018;The Harappan Civilization and Myth of Aryan &#x201C;Invasion.&#x201D;&#x2019; <a href="http://archaeologyonline.net/artifacts/aryan-harappan-myth">http://archaeologyonline.net/artifacts/aryan-harappan-myth</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Reader, C. D. &#x2018;A Geomorphological Study of the Giza Necropolis, with Implications for the Development of the Site.&#x2019; <i>Archaeometry</i>. Vol. 43; Part 1, 2001. Research Laboratory For Archaeology and the History of Art. Oxford. 2001.</p>
<p class="biblio">Reich, David et al. &#x2018;Denisova Admixture and the First Modern Human Dispersals into Southeast Asia and Oceania.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929711003958">http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929711003958</a></p>
<p class="biblio">Reid, N. &#x2018;Indigenous Australian stories and sea-level change.&#x2019; 18th Conference of the Foundation for Endangered Languages (FEL): Indigenous Languages: Value to the Community, Okinawa, Japan 17-20 September 2014. <a href="http://research.usc.edu.au/vital/access/manager/Repository/usc:14264?queryType=vitalDismax">http://research.usc.edu.au/vital/access/manager/Repository/usc:14264?queryType=vitalDismax</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Renfrew, Colin et al. &#x2018;Religion in the Emergence of Civilization: Catalhoyuk as a Case Study.&#x2019; <i>Current Anthropology</i>. Vol. 52; No. 6, 2011. University of Chicago Press. Chicago. 2011.</p>
<p class="biblio">Reyes, Raphael. &#x2018;The Austronesians, the Nusantao and the Lapita Cultural Complex: A Review of Neolithic migration in SEA and Oceania.&#x2019; <a href="https://www.academia.edu/10134524/The_Austronesians_the_Nusantao_and_the_Lapita_Cultural_Complex_A_Review_of_Neolithic_migration_in_SEA_and_Oceania">https://www.academia.edu/10134524/The_Austronesians_the_Nusantao_and_the_Lapita_Cultural_Complex_A_Review_of_Neolithic_migration_in_SEA_and_Oceania</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Richards, Zoe et al. &#x2018;New precise dates for the ancient and sacred coral pyramidal tombs of Leluh (Kosrae, Micronesia).&#x2019; <a href="http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/1/2/e1400060">http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/1/2/e1400060</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Roberts, Alison. <i>My Heart My Mother: Death and Rebirth in Ancient Egypt</i>. Northgate Publishers. Rottingdean. 2000.</p>
<p class="biblio">Romero, Simon. &#x2018;Discoveries Challenge Beliefs on Humans&#x2019; Arrival in the Americas.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/28/world/americas/discoveries-challenge-beliefs-on-humans-arrival-in-the-americas.html">http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/28/world/americas/discoveries-challenge-beliefs-on-humans-arrival-in-the-americas.html</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Rootsi, S. et al. &#x2018;Distinguishing the co-ancestries of haplogroup G Y-chromosomes in the populations of Europe and the Caucasus.&#x2019; <i>EJHG: European Journal of Human Genetics, the official journal of the</i>
<a id="page_283"></a>
<i>European Society of Human Genetics</i>. Vol. 20, No. 12, 2012. Nature Publishing Group. London. 2012</p>
<p class="biblio">Roullier, Caroline et al. &#x2018;Historical collections reveal patterns of diffusion of sweet potato in Oceania obscured by modern plant movements and recombination.&#x2019; <i>Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America</i>. <a href="http://www.pnas.org/content/110/6/2205">http://www.pnas.org/content/110/6/2205</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Rower, Lutz et al. &#x2018;Continent-Wide Decoupling of Y-Chromosomal Genetic Variation from Language and Geography in Native South Americans.&#x2019; <a href="http://journals.plos.org/plosgenetics/article?id=10.1371/journal.pgen.1003460">http://journals.plos.org/plosgenetics/article?id=10.1371/journal.pgen.1003460</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Rush, John A. (editor). <i>Entheogens and the Development of Culture</i>. North Atlantic Books. Berkeley. 2013.</p>
<p class="biblio">Schillereff, Daniel. &#x2018;From mud to moai statue: lake sediments reveal new insights into Easter Island colonization.&#x2019; <a href="http://blogs.egu.eu/network/geojenga/2013/12/17/frommudtomoaistatue/">http://blogs.egu.eu/network/geojenga/2013/12/17/frommudtomoaistatue/</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Schmidt, Klaus. <i>G&#x00F6;bekli Tepe: A Stone Age Sanctuary in South-Eastern Anatolia</i>. Exoriente. Berlin. 2012.</p>
<p class="biblio">Schmidt, Klaus. &#x2018;When Humanity Began to Settle Down.&#x2019; <i>Reports of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft</i>. Vol. 30; No. 1. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd. London. 2008.</p>
<p class="biblio">Schoch, Robert M. <i>Forgotten Civilization: The Role of Solar Outbursts in Our Past and Future</i>. Inner Traditions. Rochester. 2012. (Kindle edition.)</p>
<p class="biblio">Schoch, Robert M. &#x2018;Personal Refections on the Mystery of the Great Sphinx.&#x2019; <i>New Dawn</i> Special Issue Vol&#x2019; 8, No&#x2019; 6. 2014.</p>
<p class="biblio">Schoch, Robert M. &#x2018;Sundaland Rising: Gunung Padang &#x2013; Indonesia&#x2019;s Mysterious Lost Civilisation?&#x2019; <i>New Dawn</i> Special Issue Vol&#x2019; 8, No. 1. 2014.</p>
<p class="biblio">Schoch, Robert M. <i>Voyages of the Pyramid Builders</i>. Tarcher Penguin. New York. 2004.</p>
<p class="biblio">Schoch, Robert. &#x2018;Journey to Gunung Padang: The Case for a Lost Civilization in Indonesia.&#x2019; <a href="http://atlantisrisingmagazine.com/2014/03/01/journey-to-gunung-padang/">http://atlantisrisingmagazine.com/2014/03/01/journey-to-gunung-padang/</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Schoch, Robert. &#x2018;The Mysteries of Easter Island: A Proposal to Investigate and Possibly Uncover Significant New Evidence.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.robertschoch.com/articles/schochbaddeleyeasterislandproposal.pdf">http://www.robertschoch.com/articles/schochbaddeleyeasterislandproposal.pdf</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Schultz, Collin. &#x2018;Archaeologists Just Found a 5,600-Year-Old Pre-Dynastic Egyptian Tomb.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/archaeologists-just-found-5600-year-old-pre-dynastic-egyptian-tomb-180951389/">http://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/archaeologists-just-found-5600-year-old-pre-dynastic-egyptian-tomb-180951389/</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Schwaller de Lubicz, R. A. <i>Symbol and the Symbolic</i>. Inner Traditions. Rochester. 1978. (Reprint.)</p>
<p class="biblio">Schwartz, Howard. <i>Tree of Souls: The Mythology of Judaism</i>. Oxford University Press. Oxford. 2004.</p>
<p class="biblio">Science Daily. &#x2018;&#x201C;Immune gene&#x201D; in humans inherited from Neanderthals, study suggests.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2013/11/131122084405.htm">http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2013/11/131122084405.htm</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Sellers, Jane B. <i>The Death of Gods in Ancient Egypt</i>. Penguin Books. London. 1992.</p>
<p class="biblio">Shalomi-Hen, R.; Goyon, J.C.; Cardin, C. &#x2018;The Earliest Pictorial Representation of Osiris.&#x2019; <i>ORIENTALIA LOVANIENSIA ANALECTA</i>. International congress of Egyptologists; Grenoble, France, 2004; Sep, 2007. Peeters. Louvain. 2006 &#x2013; 2007.</p>
<a id="page_284"></a>
<p class="biblio">Shushan, Gregory. <i>Conceptions of the Afterlife in Early Civilizations</i>. Continuum International Publishing Group. London. 2009.</p>
<p class="biblio">Sidharth, B. G. <i>The Celestial Key to the Vedas</i>. Inner Traditions. Rochester. 1999.</p>
<p class="biblio">Skinner, Stephen. <i>Techniques of Graeco-Egyptian Magic</i>. Golden Hoard Press. Singapore. 2014.</p>
<p class="biblio">Skinner, Stephen. <i>Techniques of Solomonic Magic</i>. Golden Hoard Press. Singapore. 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Slav, Irina. &#x2018;Written Communication May Be 40,000 Years Old.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.newhistorian.com/written-communication-may-be-40000-years-old/3851/">http://www.newhistorian.com/written-communication-may-be-40000-years-old/3851/</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Smith, Michael E. &#x2018;V. Gordon Childe and the Urban Revolution.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.public.asu.edu/~me-smith9/1-CompleteSet/MES-09-Childe-TPR.pdf">http://www.public.asu.edu/~me-smith9/1-CompleteSet/MES-09-Childe-TPR.pdf</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Smith, Sylvia. &#x2018;Bahrain Digs Unveil One of the Oldest Civilisations.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-22596270">http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-22596270</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">SMU Research. &#x2018;Comet theory false; doesn&#x2019;t explain cold snap at the end of the Ice Age, Clovis changes or mass animal extinction.&#x2019; <a href="http://blog.smu.edu/research/2014/05/12/dating-of-supposed-extraterrestrial-impact-indicators-unreliable-fails-to-prove-comet-sparked-climate-change-at-the-end-of-the-ice-age-or-killed-clovis-people/">http://blog.smu.edu/research/2014/05/12/dating-of-supposed-extraterrestrial-impact-indicators-unreliable-fails-to-prove-comet-sparked-climate-change-at-the-end-of-the-ice-age-or-killed-clovis-people/</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Soja, E. W. &#x2018;Cities and States in Geohistory.&#x2019; <i>Theory and Society</i>. Vol. 39; No. 3 &#x2013; 4. 2010. Springer Science &amp; Business Media. New York. 2010</p>
<p class="biblio">Solheim, Wilhelm G. <i>Archaeology and Culture in Southeast Asia: Unraveling the Nusantao</i>. University of Philippines Press. Manila. 2007.</p>
<p class="biblio">Soltysiak, Arkadiusz. &#x2018;Physical anthropology and the &#x201C;Sumerian problem.&#x201D;&#x2019; <a href="http://www.antropologia.uw.edu.pl/SHA/sha-04-07.pdf">http://www.antropologia.uw.edu.pl/SHA/sha-04-07.pdf</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Spencer, Jeffrey. <i>Aspects of Early Egypt</i>. British Museum Press. London. 1996.</p>
<p class="biblio">Srivastava, Vanita. &#x2018;Harappan-era Seal Found in Rajasthan.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.hindustantimes.com/science/harappan-era-seal-found-in-rajasthan/article1-1178990.aspx">http://www.hindustantimes.com/science/harappan-era-seal-found-in-rajasthan/article1-1178990.aspx</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Staff Writers, <i>Archaeology Magazine</i>. &#x2018;Genetic Study Links Amazonians and Australasians.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.archaeology.org/news/3502-150721-amazonian-australasian-link">http://www.archaeology.org/news/3502-150721-amazonian-australasian-link</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Staff Writers, <i>Archaeology Magazine</i>. &#x2018;Stone Bracelet May Have Been Made by Denisovans.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.archaeology.org/news/3270-150507-siberia-denisovan-bracelet">http://www.archaeology.org/news/3270-150507-siberia-denisovan-bracelet</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Steiner, Richard C. &#x2018;Early Northwest Semitic Serpent Spells in the Pyramid Texts.&#x2019; <i>Journal of Semitic Studies</i>. Vol. 57, No. 2, 2012. Oxford University Press. Oxford. 2012.</p>
<p class="biblio">Stevenson, Alice. &#x2018;Cultural convergence in the Nile valley Neolithic: a prehistoric perspective on Egypt&#x2019;s place in Africa.&#x2019; <a href="https://www.academia.edu/6411856/_co-authored_Cultural_convergence_in_the_Nile_valley_Neolithic_a_prehistoric_perspective_on_Egypt_s_place_in_Africa">https://www.academia.edu/6411856/_co-authored_Cultural_convergence_in_the_Nile_valley_Neolithic_a_prehistoric_perspective_on_Egypt_s_place_in_Africa</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Stoddart, Simon &amp; Caroline Malone. &#x2018;Editorial.&#x2019; <i>Antiquity</i> 75. Antiquity Publications Ltd. 2001.</p>
<p class="biblio">Stoneking, Mark et al. &#x2018;Denisova admixture and the first modern human dispersals into southeast
<a id="page_285"></a>
Asia and Oceania.&#x2019; <i>American Journal of Human Genetics</i>, 22 September 2011. <a href="http://www.mpg.de/4438282/denisova_asia?page=1">http://www.mpg.de/4438282/denisova_asia?page=1</a> Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Stratton-Kent, Jake. <i>Geosophia: The Argo of Magic</i>. Scarlet Imprint. Dover. 2010.</p>
<p class="biblio">Swain, Tony &amp; Garry Trompf. <i>The Religions of Oceania</i>. Routledge. London. 1995.</p>
<p class="biblio">Swelim, Nabil. &#x2018;The Great Dry Moat Surrounding the Step Pyramid Complex of Horus Netjerykhet.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.nabilswelim.com/downloads/DM_ab.pdf.pdf">http://www.nabilswelim.com/downloads/DM_ab.pdf.pdf</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Symmes, Patrick. &#x2018;Turkey: Archaeological Dig Reshaping Human History.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.newsweek.com/turkey-archeological-dig-reshaping-human-history-75101">http://www.newsweek.com/turkey-archeological-dig-reshaping-human-history-75101</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Temple, Robert &amp; Olivia Temple. <i>The Sphinx Mystery</i>. Inner Traditions. Rochester. 2009.</p>
<p class="biblio">Temple, Robert. <i>Egyptian Dawn</i>. Arrow Books. London. 2011.</p>
<p class="biblio">Temple, Robert. <i>The Sirius Mystery</i>. Century. London. 1998.</p>
<p class="biblio">Tindale, N. B. et al. <i>Celestial Lore of some Australian Tribes</i>. International conference on ethnoastronomy; Songs from the sky indigenous astronomical and cosmological traditions of the world; Washington D.C, 1983. Ocarino Books. Bognor Regis. 1983.</p>
<p class="biblio">Upton, John. &#x2018;Ancient Sea Rise Tale Told Accurately for 10,000 Years.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/ancient-sea-rise-tale-told-accurately-for-10-000-years/">http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/ancient-sea-rise-tale-told-accurately-for-10-000-years/</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Usborne, David. &#x2018;US investigates National Geographic over &#x201C;corrupt payments&#x201D; to Egypt&#x2019;s keeper of antiquities.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-investigates-national-geographic-over-corrupt-payments-to-egypts-keeper-of-antiquities-8909454.html">http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-investigates-national-geographic-over-corrupt-payments-to-egypts-keeper-of-antiquities-8909454.html</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Vall&#x00E9;e, Jacques &amp; Chris Aubeck. <i>Wonders in the Sky</i>. Tarcher Penguin. London. 2009.</p>
<p class="biblio">Vall&#x00E9;e, Jacques. <i>Revelations: Alien Contact and Human Deception</i>. Ballatine Books. New York. 1991.</p>
<p class="biblio">Vall&#x00E9;e, Jacques. <i>The Invisible College</i>. Anomalist Books. San Francisco. 2014. (Reprint.)</p>
<p class="biblio">Vall&#x00E9;e, Jacques. <i>UFOs: The Psychic Solution</i>. Panther. St Albans. 1977.</p>
<p class="biblio">Van De Mieroop, Marc. <i>A History of the Ancient Near East</i>. Blackwell Publishing. Malden. 2007.</p>
<p class="biblio">Vergano, Dan. &#x2018;Cave Paintings in Indonesia Redraw Picture of Earliest Art.&#x2019; <a href="http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2014/10/141008-cave-art-sulawesi-hand-science/">http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2014/10/141008-cave-art-sulawesi-hand-science/</a>. Last accessed September 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Vogt, Yngve. &#x2018;World&#x2019;s oldest ritual discovered. Worshipped the python 70,000 years ago.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.apollon.uio.no/english/articles/2006/python-english.html">http://www.apollon.uio.no/english/articles/2006/python-english.html</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Wade, Lizzie. &#x2018;Drones and satellites spot lost civilizations in unlikely places.&#x2019; <a href="http://news.science-mag.org/archaeology/2015/02/drones-and-satellites-spot-lost-civilizations-unlikely-places">http://news.science-mag.org/archaeology/2015/02/drones-and-satellites-spot-lost-civilizations-unlikely-places</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Waxman, Sharon. &#x2018;The Show-Biz Pharaoh of Egypt&#x2019;s Antiquities.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2005/06/13/arts/design/the-showbiz-pharaoh-of-egypts-antiquities.html">http://www.nytimes.com/2005/06/13/arts/design/the-showbiz-pharaoh-of-egypts-antiquities.html</a>. Las accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">West, John Anthony. <i>Serpent in the Sky</i>. Quest Books. Wheaton. 1993.</p>
<a id="page_286"></a>
<p class="biblio">Western Daily Press. &#x2018;The &#x201C;Singing&#x201D; Stones of Stonehenge.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.bathchronicle.co.uk/singing-stones-Stonehenge/story-20750831-detail/story.html">http://www.bathchronicle.co.uk/singing-stones-Stonehenge/story-20750831-detail/story.html</a>. Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">White, Gavin. <i>Babylonian Star-Lore</i>. Solaria Publications. London. 2008.</p>
<p class="biblio">Williams, Mike. <i>Prehistoric Belief: Shamans, Trance and the Afterlife</i>. History Press. Stroud. 2010.</p>
<p class="biblio">Winter, Olaf et al. &#x2018;Austronesian Sailing to the Northern Marianas, a comment on Hung et al.&#x2019; <i>Antiquity</i> 86. Antiquity Publications Ltd. 2012.</p>
<p class="biblio">Witzel, E. J. Michael. <i>The Origins of the World&#x2019;s Mythologies</i>. Oxford University Press. Oxford. 2012.</p>
<p class="biblio">Yirka, Bob. &#x2018;Sweet potato DNA indicates early Polynesians traveled to South America.&#x2019; <a href="http://phys.org/news/2013-01-sweet-potato-dna-early-polynesians.html">http://phys.org/news/2013-01-sweet-potato-dna-early-polynesians.html</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Young, Susan. &#x2018;Canoodling with Cavemen gave Healthy Boost to Human Genome, study finds.&#x2019; <a href="http://med.stanford.edu/news/all-news/2011/08/canoodling-with-cavemen-gave-healthy-boost-to-human-genome-study-finds.html">http://med.stanford.edu/news/all-news/2011/08/canoodling-with-cavemen-gave-healthy-boost-to-human-genome-study-finds.html</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
<p class="biblio">Zapp, Ivar &amp; George Erikson. <i>Atlantis in America</i>. Adventures Unlimited Press. Kempton. 1998.</p>
<p class="biblio">Zimmer, Carl. &#x2018;A New Theory on How Neanderthal DNA Spread in Asia.&#x2019; <a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/20/science/a-new-theory-on-how-neanderthal-dna-spread-in-asia.html?_r=0">http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/20/science/a-new-theory-on-how-neanderthal-dna-spread-in-asia.html?_r=0</a>. Last accessed Sep 5, 2015.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>